                                LIFE                          323

to   mean     increased competition with other forms.      Many
effects   would depend upon whether the displacement carried
the area in question into the wet tropics or into the dry horse
latitudes, or merely from an arctic into a temperate climate.
Meanwhile, of course, in areas displaced poleward, opposite
trends would exist; here the forms of life would have to adapt
to diminishing light, to increased cold, to decreased food

supplies.
     What
        is
           important is that these changes of climate would
apply over great areas of the earth. In one movement of the
crust,two opposite quarters of the earth's surface would be
moving equatorward while two others were moving pole-
ward. Thus the climatic changes would be in the same direc-
tion over very great areas: the entire distribution, perhaps,
of many plants and animals. Mass transformation of life
forms might therefore be expected to occur; not mass trans-
formations of all life forms, of course, but merely one or two
short steps in the mass transformation of one or a few kinds
of plants or animals.     New      might be established in
                                varieties

great numbers, during a single movement of the crust; but
by this I do not mean to imply that many new "species"
would be. The latter may be the end results of a considerable
number       of displacements of the crust. I hope that the reader
will not ask      me to define "species." In this book I use the
term simply to denote forms of life that are reasonably dis-
tinct and relatively permanent.
  We must remember that the different areas of the earth's
surface would be unequally shifted in a crust displacement.
I have
        explained (Introduction) that the amount of the dis-
placement would depend on whether an area was near to, or
distant from, the meridian of displacement. Selection pres-
sures     would vary accordingly.
         we consider displacements to have taken place in
     Since
short periods of the order of 10 or 20 thousand years, it seems

likely that most plants and animals in areas radically dis-
placed by a given      movement would be      unlikely to succeed
in adapting.     Some would    migrate into areas having climates
324                      EARTH'S SHIFTING CRUST
similar to their accustomed climates.              Some would       disappear.
Some would develop             varieties   adapted to changed conditions.
Even though there would be no wholesale creation of new
plants and animals, the age-long process of change would
have received an acceleration.
  Another important, generally accepted requirement for
evolution, as already suggested, besides climatic change, is geo-
graphical isolation to permit the development of new vari-
eties.    Geneticists agree that the larger the population of a

given sort of plant or animal, the harder it is for a new variety
to get established, because crossbreeding tends to destroy the
new           If, however, populations are cut off from each
         variety.
other, and are  reduced in numbers, a new variant has a much
better chance to become dominant, and establish itself as a
variety in that locality. As already pointed out, crust dis-
placements can account for the alternation of conditions of
geographical isolation and intercommunication at the tempo
required to account for evolution, because they can account
for rapid, recurrent changes of sea level. Let us now visualize
the consequences of a displacement of the crust resulting in a
subsidence of a continental area displaced equatorwards. Let
us suppose a moderate subsidence of a few hundred feet only,
over a period of a few thousand years. The result, of course,
would be the deep intrusion of the sea into the continent.
The sea would invade valleys, cutting off one part of the
mainland from another, and creating islands and island
groups. Many populations of the same kind of plant or ani-
mal would thus be isolated, and left for many thousands of
years to develop and establish new variant forms.
  Let us suppose many new varieties to have become estab-
lished in the islands, and in areas of the mainland separated
from each other by tongues of the sea. The next requirement
of evolution        is   that these    new   varieties   should be brought
into competition           and
                     that the best adapted of them should
be disseminated into more varied habitats. This might be
brought about by a new movement of the                       crust,   such as
would displace           this area   poleward.   The   area will   now be   up-
                                LIFE                         .325
lifted,     the sea will withdraw, and the life forms formerly
isolated will     mingle and enter a phase of competition.
      The   situation that compels the adaptation of the forms of
life to colder,   drier climates (poleward displacement) also will

adapt the forms of        life to higher elevations, to mountain

heights.Thus, if we consider all the effects of crust displace-
ment, both toward the equator and toward the poles, we can
see that crust displacement constitutes the most powerful

engine imaginable for forcing life forms to adapt to all
possible habitats.




-/.
      The Distribution   of Species


Another important question is the problem of the origin of
the present and past distribution of species over the face of
the earth. Darwin and Wallace attempted to explain the
numerous difficulties in this field, but their explanations
have, in general, become less and less satisfactory with the
passing years. These are the questions:
  a. How did certain species cross wide oceans to become

established on different continents?
  b. What accounts for the richness of some islands, and the

impoverishment of others, with respect to their fauna and
flora?
  c. How did many kinds of animals and
                                             plants get dis-
tributed from the north temperate to the south temperate
zones, or from one polar zone to another, across the tropics?
  d. Why are certain species of fresh-water fish, inhabiting
the lakes      and rivers of Europe,   also   found in the lakes and
rivers of     North America?
      Some
        of the answers to these puzzling questions will al-
ready be clear from what has been said about land bridges.
Land bridges, or sunken continents, are obviously necessary
to explain many of these distributions between continents
and between continents and islands. Sunken continents have
already been discussed (Chapter V). Here I would like to
526             EARTH'S SHIFTING CRUST
discuss the situation that confronts us if   we   are not allowed
to postulate sunken continents or land bridges.
   If           find an acceptable mechanism to account for
        we cannot
the creation and destruction of land bridges (or sunken conti-
                                                   '


nents) we are forced back upon the ingenious 'sweepstakes"
idea, which has been much overworked, as an explanation
of the distribution of species. This idea arose because it was
observed that sea birds, or migratory birds, may carry the
seeds of plants or the eggs of insects from continent to conti-
nent, and that some species manage to cross, by chance,
bodies of water on floating objects such as logs or even ice.
By conveniently ignoring about nine tenths of the evidence,
this idea has been given considerable importance. Even

though many species have migrated in this way, the idea is no
substitute for land bridges. Nor, it may be added, is one land

bridge, at Behring Strait, able to do the work of explaining
the infinite number of plant and animal migrations in all
climatic zones in all geological periods. Many land bridges
are required, and for these an explanation is necessary. The
theory presented in this book, however, can explain the crea-
tion and destruction of land bridges (and sunken continents),
and therefore it can explain the distribution of species across
large bodies of water.
  The impoverishment of certain island faunas and floras as
compared with others may be understood as follows. Some
of these islands may have rich faunas and floras because, in
recent time, they have had land connections with adjacent
continents. This would be true of the Philippines, of Java,
of Sumatra, and of numerous other islands in that area,
whose former continental connections with either Asia or
Australia have been argued for by Wallace (446) and others.
It is not a question of showing that the
                                             species in these
islands came from the continents; it is simply true that there
were land connections, and that the species wandered back
and forth; we don't know where they originated.
  An island like Java can have a rich fauna and flora not only
because of having had rather recent connections with the
                                LIFE                              327

continent of Asia, but also because       it is   mountainous. This
makes    possible, supposing at some time an equatorward
          it

displacement of the island into a warmer latitude, for tem-
perate climate species to ascend into the mountains and so
survive. Such variety of climatic conditions, due to differ-
ences of altitude of different parts of the island,       would favor
the preservation of a rich flora and fauna.
  Let us contrast with Java the situation of a small island or
island group, such as the Bermudas, the Azores, or the Ca-
naries,    where, in general,   we     find the    life   forms to be
impoverished. These islands, often far from the nearest
continent,may have been separated from them, of course, for
long periods of time. Now let us suppose one of them, say
the Azores, to be displaced through about 2,000 miles of
latitude inone movement of the crust, in either direction.
Where     will the indigenous species go? Obviously, there will
be no   refuge for them; therefore, many of them will succumb.
Subsequently, the sea will be an effective barrier to the re-
population of the islands from the mainland.
  As    to the distribution of life forms across the climatic
zones, referred to as "bipolar mirrorism," Darwin proposed
an explanation in Chapter 12 of the Origin of Species that
can no longer be accepted.   He supposed, % first, that glacial
periods  alternated in  the Northern   and Southern Hemi-
spheres. This idea has long since been given up. Then, Dar-
win reasoned that when there was an ice age in the Northern
Hemisphere, the climatic zones would be displaced south-
ward, and the temperate zone species would migrate south-
ward. When that ice age ended, and the climate warmed up,
the temperate species that had migrated southward would
now ascend into the mountains, where they would survive,
in the tropic zone. There are, of course, mountains in the

tropics high enough to be snow-capped the year around;
on these even arctic plants might exist.
   The next step, according to Darwin, would be the onset
of an ice age in the Southern Hemisphere. Now the tempera-
ture in the southern tropics would fall, and become temper-
328            EARTH'S SHIFTING CRUST
ate,and the temperate       species wcmld descend from their
mountains and migrate      across the valleys southward to the
south temperate zone. In this way the migration of the species
from the northern to the southern temperate zone would
be accomplished.
  Now this idea of the species clambering up and down the
mountainsides in response to the changing weather is a good
one,  and gives us one key to the problem. Where Darwin
went wrong was in his alternating ice age theory; he could
hardly be blamed, in view of the prevailing ignorance about
ice ages. Darwin, of course, lived at a time when people were
first getting used to the idea of ice ages. But if Darwin was

wrong, if ice ages do not regularly alternate in the Northern
and Southern Hemispheres, how do we explain bipolar
mirrorism? For some decades now, glaciologists have been
holding grimly to the theory that ice ages were always simul-
taneous in the two hemispheres. In maintaining this view,
they have ignored the fact that they have made mincemeat
of Darwin's explanation of bipolar mirrorism. But this does
not concern them.  They are concerned with explaining ice
ages, not with the distribution of species. They have sug-
gested no alternative explanation for the migration of species
across the climatjc zones. Instead, they have constructed a

theory that puts the migration of species, and even the sur-
vival of tropical species, into the realm of sheer impossibility.

   They insist, we remember, that the temperature of the
whole earth was simultaneously lowered in glacial periods.
We have seen that at various times in the past great conti-
nental icecaps have existed at sea level within the tropics,
and even on the equator itself. I have already pointed out
that if the world temperature had been lowered enough to

permit a continental icecap in the Congo, there would have
been no place of refuge for tropical species of plants and
animals.   Nowhere along the circle of the equator around the
earth would any tropical species have survived. This would
be equally true of land and sea forms of life.
   Bipolar mirrorism, however, presents no problems        if   we
                                             LIFE                                   329

reconsider         it    in terms of displacements of the crust. One
movement,          let    us suppose, takes the Rocky Mountains 2,000
miles to the south.             The species climb higher.          Later, in a series
of    movements of the crust (not always, of course, in the same

direction), the  Rockies finally end up south of the equator,
in a temperate climate. Now the species climb down, and

occupy the temperate valleys of the Southern Hemisphere.
The mountain               chain has functioned            as   a ferryboat, simply
transporting species back and forth.
     At   this   point     it is   interesting to reflect     on how useful it is
to    have these high mountain ranges. A                     low mountain range
would never     do. It could never ferry a load of species across
the tropical zone.




5.    The Periods         of Revolutionary          Change      in Life   Forms

The       reader      may have gained          the impression that, while cer-
tain aspects of evolution have escaped satisfactory explana-
tion, at least the process itself has continued evenly through
all   time.      To     this   reader   it   may come     as a shock, as it       did to
me, to learn that this is not at all the case. There have been
remarkable variations in the rate of evolution. For long
periods it has marked time, and then some force, hitherto
unidentified, has initiated a phase of rapid change, a revolu-
tion changing so many forms of plant and animal life as to
alter the general              complexion of     life   on the    earth. All paleon-

        appear
tologists                  to agree     on    this point. Dr.      Simpson uses the
term "Virenzperiod" to define the periods of rapid change.
Others refer to "explosive" phases of evolution or to "quan-
tum evolution." It must be understood that development
during these periods is rapid only                      relatively;   new forms      are
still not created overnight.

      One phenomenon        that frequently occurs during these

periods     is   termed "adaptive radiation." This is a kind of ex-
plosion in which one form (or species) rapidly gives rise to
dozens, scores, or even hundreds of new forms apparently at
330            EARTH'S SHIFTING CRUST
one and the same time.   How    is   this    phenomenon accounted
for?
  We   must distinguish between the biological process and
the circumstances that cause it to occur. The process is easily
explained. Let us suppose that a form of plant or animal is
widely spread over a considerable area. Its total population
may include some millions of individuals; over its whole
distribution there will be local variations in the environ-
ment, and consequently there will be selection pressures
operating simultaneously but in different directions on differ-
ent parts of the population in different habitats. New vari-
eties of the plant or animal will tend to appear to take

advantage of special opportunities offered by particular local
environments. This sort of thing is always going on, but it
does not, by itself, produce explosions of adaptive radiation,
  Something more is required. Normally, a new variety of
any form has to compete with other forms already in posses-
sion of the necessary supplies of food, light, and water. The
situation that has the particular combination of these things

required by a given plant or animal is referred to as its life,
or ecological, niche. Naturally,
                               if this niche is already effec-

tively occupied the spread of the  new variety is restricted,
As an analogy, think of a garden in which you have set out
one hundred expensive strawberry plants of a totally new
variety, just before being called away for two months on
urgent business requiring your presence in a foreign country
What now happens? Weeds immediately take over the niche
you had hoped to preserve (artificially) for the spread of the
strawberry plants. Their spread is restricted, and their sur-
vival may be threatened.
   In nature what seems to be required to permit the ver)
rapid dissemination of many new variant forms of the orig
inal plant or animal is an absence of competition. Empty life
niches are required.   The   question       is,   How
                                             an empty life
                                                        is

niche produced? Occasionally, of course, it may have beer
there from the beginning; it may never have been occupied
because, presumably, there never was any form of life thai
                                          LIFE                                331

could  utilize it, but after two billion or more years of evolu-

tion, such  primeval biological vacuums are few indeed. Life
niches have, in general, been very well occupied for a very
long time. Something is required, therefore, to empty them.
  This is where our theory comes in. The effects of a dis-
placement can be visualized in two stages. In the first, a
movement              of a large continental area through
                                             many degrees
of latitude might well cause a very general extermination
of the inhabitants.             We
                       have seen how, in several instances,
this       occurred during the late Pleistocene (Chapter VIII).
The consequence         of the extermination of many kinds of
    and animals (which is not to say their extinction, for
plants
many them might survive in other areas) would be to leave
               of
their life niches empty.
  The second stage, initiated   by a new movement of the
crust, would be marked by the opening up of avenues for the

immigration of life forms from other land areas. Life forms
entering the continent would now enjoy a field day. They
would multiply; they would occupy rapidly a tremendous
area and all manner of habitats; they would produce variant
forms, and the variant forms would occupy appropriate
niches. Thus explosive evolution would take place. The new
forms need not always be immigrants; they could equally
well be local survivors of the period of depopulation, of the

displacement, who had somehow                    managed    to   hold their   own
under unfavorable conditions.                    It   seems highly probable,
indeed, that displacements of the earth's crust are the ex-
planation of explosive evolution.
  We have already made mention of the fact that an interrela-
tionship between the revolutionary periods in evolution and
the critical phases of change in other geological areas has
been noted by many observers. Lull, for example,                      says,

       .   .   .   There are times of quickening, the expression points of evo-
 lution,           which are almost invariably coincident with some great geolog-
 ical change, and the correspondence is so exact and so frequent that
  the laws of chance may not be invoked as an explanation (278:687).
332                  EARTH'S SHIFTING CRUST

  Umbgrove mentions two                 specific      examples of         this phe-
nomenon:
       The most important       point of   all,   as far as   we   are concerned,   is

     that the  two major periods of strong differentiation of plant life
     correspond with two major periods of mountain-building and glacia-
     tion of the Upper Paleozoic and Pleistocene (429:292).

     The same        described by Professor Erling Dorf, of
                   thing   is

Princeton (349:575-91).           We
                            need not take too seriously the
small    number
              of turning points mentioned by                         them   for the
reason that everything, after all, is relative.                     The     turning
points mentioned by Umbgrove might turn out to have been,
in some respects, the most important turning points in the
history of life, and yet there may have been a hundred lesser,
but    still   very important, turning points.
     Geologists    who have       sought an explanation of the                rela-

tionship between biological and geological change have, in
some  cases, favored the idea that geological change, such as
the formation of new mountain ranges, might have caused
both  ice ages and biological change.                We
                                          have seen that this
will not account for ice ages.             We
                                   have also seen that geolo-
gists now generally admit their failure to explain mountain

building. It is unsatisfactory to attempt to explain the known
by the unknown; it will not do to drag in mountain build-
ing as the cause of evolution,                    when    the former also           is

unexplained.
  Displacements of the earth's crust appear to be the con-
necting link between these different processes: they explain,
at   one and the same time,         ice ages,     mountain formation, and
the significant turning points of evolution.



6.    The Extinction       of Species


It has already      been shown (Chapter VIII) that our theory can
provide an explanation for the extinction of species. Some
further discussion of this problem is, however, required.
  It has been suggested that the history of any particular
                                      LIFE                              333

species can       be compared with the       life   of an individual, with
its
    phases of youth, maturity, and old age. Thus, the ex-
plosive period is the youth of a species, the period of quiet
and prosperous enjoyment of its life niche is maturity, and
its degenerative phase is its old age. Finally, extinction re-
sults from the exhaustion of the vital force of the species.
This theory assumes an innate cause, and a natural order for
the succession of the phases.
  This idea has been widely disseminated,                   and in one form
or another       it    has served to confuse all the issues and obscure
the    known     facts. It is   one more of those philosophical abstrac-
tions that people resort to          who come up against an unsolved
problem and cannot stand the psychological tension of                  per-
severing in the search for truth. It                is
                                                         important that the
essentials of this        matter should be   made        clear.
      In the  place, the idea that a species is analogous to an
               first

individual, and must go through similar phases, is a modern
revival of the Scholastic logic of the Middle Ages, like the
microcosm-macrocosm analogy (according to which some
people have recently argued that since planets are satellites
of the sun,       and    electrons are satellites of the nucleus of the
atom, then planets are exactly like electrons, and must obey
the same laws of physics). The alleged vital force, which is

supposed to set a preordained limit to the life of a species,
completely escapes scientific observation and experiment.
It is not only a mere assumption, it is also an unjustified

assumption.
  The     facts of      paleontology do not agree with the analogy of
the life phases of a species with that of an individual. In very
many cases the same phase may be repeated several times in
the    life          and other phases may be omitted alto-
              of a species,
gether, as we shall see below. For this reason the theory
brings caustic comment from Dr. Simpson. After discussing
the two phases of adaptive radiation (youth) and "intrazonal

adaptation" (establishment in a stable but limited environ-
ment), which is analogous to maturity which often do follow
each other in this order he explains their relationship thus:
334                    EARTH'S SHIFTING CRUST
       The sequence radiation-intrazonal evolution is usual, simply be-
     cause radiation does not occur unless there are diverse zones within
     which evolution      will follow.   Occasionally, nevertheless, something
                to close the zones so soon that radiation    is curtailed, or the
     happens
     intrazonal phase is even shorter than the radiation. The camariate
     crinoids, for instance, seem to have been in the full swing of a radia-
     tion    when   they all became extinct in the Carboniferous.     .   .   .
                                                                                  (390:
     232).

We note             Simpson says, "something happens." What
                that Dr.

happens?        He
               does  not care to suggest what might happen to
close the zones, to curtail the radiation, to destroy the species.
No  one has ever suggested a reasonable explanation of these
things, but they can be understood as effects of repeated dis-
placements of the crust.
  Dr. Simpson has remarked elsewhere that he does not ob-
ject to theanalogy of the species and the individual, provided
it may  be allowed that youth may follow maturity, and may
occur more than once!
   Not only may phases occur in the wrong order, and be
repeated, but also some may be omitted altogether. This
seems particularly true of the last, or so-called senile, period.
No concept has had so wide a currency with so little support
in evidence as that of the alleged degeneration of species.
The reasoning behind it is essentially specious: if a form of
life becomes extinct, and if some "exaggerated" trait can be

pointed to, which might have produced this extinction, then
it is claimed that the
                         species was degenerate. This is, of
course, merely hindsight, because it ignores the fact that
some of the oddest creatures in the world have lasted for
millions of years      and still exist. It is true that some kinds of
plants       and animals become adapted to very narrowly special-
ized environments, so that an almost imperceptible change
in the environment may destroy them. These forms may, if
you       be called overspecialized, but they cannot be called
        like,

degenerate. No inner process of decay has taken place in the
organism. Its extinction results from the external circum-
stance that destroys its relationship with its environment. Is
the specialist,        who   has spent his entire       life   in the study of
                                        LIFE                              335

the pre-Cambrian, and therefore is incapable of making his
living in any field outside of geology, or even outside pre-
Cambrian geology, degenerate? If he starves to death, is his
extinction due to degeneration? The reasoning is analogous.
  But, supposing that we allow a phenomenon of degenera-
tion in species, it is still true that most species disappear with-
out showing any indication whatever of a decline of their
'Vital force/' The majority of them are cut off in the vigor
of maturity, or in "youth," as in the case of the camariate
crinoids. Moreover, there is no rule as to the relative length
of the different periods. Dr. Simpson remarks:

    Diversification may be brief or prolonged, and may be of limited

  scope or may ramify into the most extraordinarily varied zones cover-
  ing a breadth of total adaptation that would have been totally unpre-
  dictable      and incredible   if   we were aware only   of the beginning of
  the process (390:222-23).


  Again, he        says,

    .   .
         Episodes of proliferation may come early, middle or late in
            .



  the history of a group. This confirms the conclusion that adaptive
  radiation is episodic but not cyclic (390:235).


  We  have already noted that Darwin recognized that the
ordinary competition of species could not account for the
mass extinction of whole groups, of which, even then, there
were many known instances in the fossil record. Since his
day, paleontologists have found very many more cases of
apparently well-adapted species, which in some cases had
flourished for tens of millions of years and yet suddenly dis-

appeared, sometimes leaving their life niches empty, and at
other times giving way to inferior species as their successors.
For the Pleistocene alone, the last million years, as we have
seen, the       examples of      this   include the   mammoth,    the masto-
don, the sabertooth cat, the giant beaver, the giant sloth, the
giant bison, and countless extinct varieties of still existing
forms like horses, deer, camels, peccaries, armadillos, wolves,
bears, etc. Dr. Simpson, in discussing the extinction of the
dinosaurs, remarks:
336                   EARTH'S SHIFTING CRUST
       It   should be emphasized that these mass extinctions are not in-
  stantaneous, or even brief, events.  They extend over periods of tens
  of millions of years.     This makes the phenomenon all the more
                              .    .   .




  mysterious, because we  have to think of environmental changes that
  not only affected a great many different groups in different environ-
  ments, but also did so very slowly and very persistently. The only
  general and true statement that can now be made about, say, the ex-
  tinction of the dinosaurs                is   that they all lost adaptation in the course
  of    some long environmental change the nature of which                      is   entirely
  unknown        (390:302).

  If the        dinosaurs     lost       adaptation, it was not because they
changed.        The same      is       true of the sabertooth cat, which had a
life   span of 40,000,000 years and, according to Simpson, was
apparently as well adapted at the end of that period as at
the beginning (392:43-44). The gradual elimination of the
dinosaurs can be understood as the result of constant shift-
ings of the earth's crust, which eliminated these reptiles first
in one area and then in another. No doubt, dinosaurs re-

peatedly reoccupied areas from which they had previously
been eliminated, but eventually perhaps much more re-
cently than some people think they were destroyed. Being
cold-blooded creatures, of course, they would find it quite
intolerable to be shifted into the cold zones, but there is not
the slightest reason to think they were degenerate. Simpson
attacks the entire idea of degeneration of species (392:72, 81).
He     quotes Rensch:

       In innumerable cases lineages become extinct without there being
  recognizable in the last forms any sort of morphological or patholog-
  ical      degenerative   phenomena              (390:292).

  Professor        Dodson         gives a           good example of the piecemeal
extinction of species. He cites the case of the mastodonts,
relatives of the elephants, which became extinct first in the
old world and then in the new (115:371). Other examples
could be cited from the Pleistocene, when many species be-
came        extinct in the Americas, while their close relatives, such
as horses, camels,        and various kinds of elephants, survived
in the Eastern        Hemisphere.                  Now one might ask       the question,
                                                        LIFE                  337

If a species becomes extinct on one continent                     but continues
to flourish on another, is it or is it not senile?                 What  stage is
it    in then?               We    can understand all these events as the results
of piecemeal destructions of animal populations in crust

displacements.                    We
                  can see in them the process of the creation
of empty environments, preparing the way for a new stage
of explosive evolution. Simpson directly suggests the connec-
tion between these two things:

       .   .
            Opportunity may come as an inheritance from the dead, the
               .




     extinct,who bequeath adaptive zones free from competitors. Jurassic
     Virenz for ammonites followed extinction of all but one family, per-
     haps all but one genus, of Triassic ammonites; early Tertiary mam-
     malian Virenz followed mysterious decimation of the Cretaceous
                    .
     reptiles.           .   .
                                 (392:73)-

      There             is       another question regarding the extinction of
species that should be answered. Perhaps it will be asked, If
crust displacements killed off the dinosaurs, why did they
not eliminate also the very numerous other reptiles that                      still

survive? If the last displacement at the close of the Pleisto-
cene eliminated the mammoth and certain other mammals
from America, why did other animals survive? The answer
is,    essentially,        a question of the mathematical
                                   that      it   is

chances of survival. It   a question of the numbers of the
                                                  is

animals, the geographical extent and variety of their habitats,
their particular individual aptitudes, and the ever-present
factor of sheer accident. It may be true that size militated

against            some        but it may have worked in favor of
                                  species,
others.            The
                     very largest animal of all the whale still sur-
vives.         Elephants compare favorably with all but the very
largest extinct                    mammals.



7.    The Gaps                   in the Fossil         Record

One        further point remains for our consideration.                A   feature
of the fossil record that greatly impressed Darwin was the
curious way in which species appear, full-blown, with no
338            EARTH'S SHIFTING CRUST
indication of transition forms,   much   like the mythical birth
of Venus.  The paleontologist suddenly comes upon a species,
or a whole group of them, which have not been found be-
fore. They are all fully evolved; they obviously have had

long histories; there must have been hundreds or even thou-
sands of ancestral forms for them; but absolutely no trace of
the preceding forms can be found. It happened this way with
the dinosaurs, which appeared in Africa, with a great many
species already fully developed, at the beginning of the
Mesozoic Era. They seem to have come, literally, out of noth-
ing. Sometimes ancestral forms of a particular plant or ani-
mal will be found at a great distanceon another continent,
perhaps but always there appear to have existed many inter-
mediary links, which have been lost. Even in the case of the
horse, where an unusually good record exists, there are many
missing links.
  A part of the reason for this situation        is,   of course, the

imperfect preservation of the fossil record. There appear to
be several reasons for this. Fossilization itself is a very rare
event; very few individuals of any species are preserved, and
the great majority of all the species that have existed have
disappeared without a    trace.   Then, of the    fossils   that were

preserved in the rocks since the beginning of the sedimentary
record, about 95 per cent have been destroyed, since about
that percentage of all the sedimentary rocks of the older

periods has been eroded away and redeposited, with conse-
quent destruction of all fossils. Finally, of the fossils that
have been preserved, it is very unlikely that paleontologists
can have seen and studied more than a very insignificant pro-
portionlet us say, to put the matter as liberally as possible,
that they may have seen one millionth of the existing fossils.

Many  of the latter, of course, are buried deep in the earth
or under the numerous shallow seas, and will never be seen.
  But true as this is, it does not quite satisfy. Relatively few
and scattered as fossils may be, it is still to be wondered at
that we do not have a respectable handful of reasonably com-

plete life histories. The light cast on this matter by the theory
                                    LIFE                            339

of crust displacement       is
                                 quite startling.   We   have seen that
such movements would necessitate frequent migrations of
whole faunas and floras. It would necessarily follow, from the
theory of crust displacement, that species would as a rule be
separated by considerable geographical distances from the
places of their origin. This would be all the more certain
since the rate of development of new forms is probably very
slow as compared with the rate at which crust displacements
may occur. It could, actually, be rather seldom that one plant
or animal would complete much of its life history in the same
place. The "missing links" would usually have been sepa-
rated by great geographical distances from the homes of their
descendants. Moreover, the successive movements of the
crust,  with the resulting changes in the distribution of land
and   sea, would leave much of the fossil record under the pres-
ent shallow (or even deep)        seas,   and out of our   reach.




8.   Summary

To sum     up:    it   would seem    that in crust displacements we
have the missing factor that can bring          all the other evolu-

tionary factors into proper focus and correct perspective. By
crust displacements we may accelerate the tempo of natural
selection, provide the conditions of isolation        and competition
required for change in       life   forms, and account for periods of
revolutionary change, for the distribution of species across
oceans and climatic zones, and for the extinction of species.
We may     also   account for the significant association of turn-
ing points in evolution with geological and climatic changes,
presenting them as different results of the same cause. But for
crust displacements to have had these effects, and if they are,
indeed, to account for the evolution of species, they must
have occurred very often throughout the history of the earth.
XI     :   CAMPBELL'S MECHANISM OF
           DISPLACEMENT

i.   The Logic   of the   Evidence

Readers of     this   volume may have reached the conclusion
that displacements of the earth's crust have occurred, perhaps

frequently, and very recently in the earth's history, and yet
they may doubt that the icecaps caused the displacements.
It   may seem    to   them   that other causes      may have brought
about these    effects,   or perhaps that a combination of causes
has done so.
     There are  several reasons for concluding that the cen-

trifugal effects of asymmetrically placed icecaps were, in fact,
the cause of the displacements. The first of these is that con-
tinental icecaps are the most massive and the most rapidly

developed dislocations of mass known to have occurred at
any time on the       earth's surface. All other     known
                                                 geological
processes subject to measurement, such as erosion and vol-
canic activity, are inadequate in tempo or in quantity to
produce equal centrifugal         effects.   No    dislocation of mass
within the earth,     known   or conjectured, can compare quanti-
                                                  an icecap
tatively in equal periods of time with the effect of
of the magnitude of the present icecap in Antarctica. Every
theory so far advanced to account for changes at the surface
of the earth (such as displacements of the crust) by changes
in depth have postulated long periods for the completion of
the changes. The geological evidence presented in this book
can be understood only in terms of displacements of the crust
at very short intervals during at least a large part of the
earth's history, with a most recent displacement through no
less than 2,000 miles of latitude in a period of about 10,000

years at the   end of the North American          ice age.
     All this evidence calls for a large displacing force that
                     CAMPBELL'S MECHANISM                            341

will overcome the inertia of the crust and its friction with
the layer below it, to continue the displacements to distances
of the order of several thousand miles. It is essential to have
a force that will not be absorbed and exhausted by the work
of   moving the                             mechanism of cen-
                     crust. It is clear that the

trifugal    effect   postulated by Campbell can meet this re-
quirement because the effect increases in proportion as the
uncompensated mass of the icecap is moved farther from the
axis of rotation. At the same time, as I have already men-
tioned, a cause of displacement is called for that will cease to
exert these centrifugal effects at some distance from the pole,
but long before the equator is reached. To accomplish this,
the mechanism must provide that the mass responsible for
the displacement must itself disappear en route, and, as we
have seen, it must disappear rapidly. It seems that the melt-
ing of the icecap, as the         movement   brings   it   into   warmer
latitudes, provides     not only a sufficient but perhaps the only
conceivable     method of explaining the facts.

     Campbell   has made this clear by computing the increase
of the centrifugal effect with increasing distance from the axis
for the present Antarctic icecap, assuming it to be uncom-

pensated,    and assuming        itsdisplacement, without melting,
as far as the equator.      He    has shown (Table III, opposite p.
341,   and Figure XII,              the icecap should be dis-
                           p. 343) that if
placed as far as the 45th parallel of South Latitude, the
tangential component of its centrifugal effect would be mul-
tiplied about six times. After this point, while the total
centrifugal effect operating at right angles to the axis con-
tinues to increase until the equator is reached, the tangential

component declines, and yet it is clear that the movement,
if the
       uncompensated mass itself remains intact, must con-
tinue to the vicinity of the equator itself. The geological
evidence already presented shows that this did not occur, but
that the movements terminated at points about one third of
the distance from the pole to the equator.
  In view of the apparently inescapable logic of the geo-
logical evidence and of the centrifugal mechanics, we must
                             --
                  2 r 3


                  "8
                                    1



       cr
              4       * s               fe

       w          -




       %                      o         rr4


       E          *;  <u



                      o.ts-S
                              <u
                                                              o
                                                              h
                                                              -
                                                        tj

                                                              "8
                  JB-SI                                 cti
                                                        w ^
       5              ffgl
       1S             2 'SB
       f--S
                  p
                       bo
                              >
                              ..
                                    .*-


                                                        ti    2
                                                                        ass
                                                                        222                  2     2
       .8* '5
       Qcrj
         2
          w
                       y 2
                         ^
                      fcti
                              -si
                              ^J*




                                  CJ
                                    'So
                                        P
                                        p^
                                                        a
                                                              o
                                                                        XXX
                                                                        to     Of
                                                                                             X     X
                                                                                                   00
                              cu *r3                                    Of     00     OO
        p,             <u
                                                                                      Of
                                                                                                   cq
                                                              co
        s              ?,                                                      OO     CO           06
                                        S
        8              ^ w

                      ^il                                               S
                                                                        o      I
                       s-l^
         CO                   O
                        M
         Ctf                  *-
                                                                        X      X      X      X     X
         U
                                                         a
                                                                                             19
                                                                                             Of
        ttt


              t
                        Q
         So
                       Jl                                      I
                                                         Tl    ^3
                                                                         Th    oo
                        CH
                        OJ
                              r-H

                               Cj
                                         c/5
                                         0>       SJ           -         of     >fi
                                                                                       *"j
                                                                                      oo
                                                         ?M    ^                             Ol
                                                                                             OO
        U ^0
          >*fH                 c_
                                         CO
                                         fl   j
                                                  "0,
                                                  U
                                                  M
                                                          S
                                                              |.
                                                         nJ   LL
                       r2 ^-
                        ^
                        * ho             *3       Irt
                               ff.tJ              s
                                                          S         d
                       ll|                               I'S-S           IT)    T^H    O     O      3LO
          on
                       s^lK                                              S      ?2    S       TH
                                                                                             co
                                                                                                   OO
                                                                                                    q^
                        3                                                                    oo     oo
M
rj
P""l
          <n
          H  T3
             "O
          bb cH
          /^
                       *i-i

                               US                        331
                                                         ^ w
w
          <u
                               h?
                               U >                QJ

                                                          p             o      o                    o
                                                                         *O     vO           iT5     *o
                                                                        OO     CO            Of
                      CAMPBELL'S MECHANISM                             343

examine with some care the mechanism that Campbell pro-
poses as an explanation of displacements.



2.
      Calculating the Centrifugal Effect

I    have already mentioned        how
                                   preliminary calculations were
made     of the possible centrifugal effect of the Antarctic cap.
I    have mentioned that the calculation was              first   made by
Buker, and        later   somewhat revised by Campbell. However,
Campbell recognized,          early in his examination of the theory,
that this effect, since       itoperated at right angles to the axis
of rotation    and was not tangential        to the surface,   would not
produce a horizontal movement of the crust, even if the
magnitude of the effect was sufficient for the purpose. It
would be necessary, he felt, to find the tangential component
of    the     quantity of the centrifugal effect. He ac-
            total

complished       by the application of the principle of the
                  this

parallelogram of forces (Figure XII). However, his use of the




                                            METRIC TOWS




Fig. XII.   The     Centrifugal Effect of the Icecap. Use of the Parallelo-
            gram     of Forces to Calculate the Tangential Component
344                        EARTH'S SHIFTING CRUST

principle    not that usually presented in high school and
                 is

college textbooks of physics. The definition of the law of the
parallelogram of forces             is   as follows:

      If   two            on a point be represented in direction and
                 forces acting

  intensity by the adjacent sides of a parallelogram, their resultant will
  be represented by that diagonal of the parallelogram which passes
  through the point (249:489).

  In the three parallelograms in Figure XII, the two forces
acting on the point a are the force of gravity, represented by
the line a-d (a radial line to the center of the earth), and the
tangential component of the centrifugal effect of the icecap,
represented by the line a-c, while the "resultant" of these
forces is the diagonal a-b, at right angles to the axis of rota-
tion. The reader will note that Campbell has here inverted
the terms of the definition but without changing the quanti-
ties of the forces in relationship to each other. The "re-
            '

sultant* in the definition is our starting point; it                          is   the
estimated total centrifugal effect of the icecap. But it                      is evi-

dent that        it is     unimportant whether the given quantity             is   the
diagonal or the side of the parallelogram; the parallelogram
permits the finding of the unknown quantity from the known
quantity, whichever the latter is. The parallelogram there-
fore permits a finding of the quantity of the tangential com-

ponent.         The        rotating effect of this force exerted on the
earth's crust         is   illustrated by the weight shown in Figure XIV.

  By       definition, the tangential            component of the       centrifugal
        exerted horizontally on the earth's crust. Now the
effect is

question arises as to whether this force will be exerted on
the crust        itself,    or whether     it   will act   on the
                                                        body as     earth's
a whole, and thus tend to be dissipated in depth. This is the
same as the question whether the icecap will tend to shift the
whole planet on its axis or merely to shift the crust. We have
already decided that it will tend to shift the crust only, be-
cause of the existence of a soft, viscous, and plastic layer
under the          crust.     We   may    therefore conceive of this force,
the tangential             component     of the total effect, as acting       on the
                         CAMPBELL'S MECHANISM                                345

crust alone, while recognizing that the displacement of the
crust involves frictional effects with the sublayer.   have           We
seen that a special characteristic of the mechanism under
discussion is that it provides a constantly growing force that
will overcome this friction, rather than be absorbed by it.




3.    The Wedge Effect

The problem      be solved by the calculation was to find the
                         to

quantity of the centrifugal thrust of the icecap in terms of
pressure per square inch on the earth's crust, so that this
quantity could be compared with the estimated tensile
strength of the crust. If these quantities should be found to
be of about the same magnitude, it would follow that the
icecap had the potentiality of bringing about the fracturing
of the crust, which, because of the slightly oblate shape of the
earth, was necessary to its displacement over the lower layers.
Einstein, in a letter received during an early stage of the in-
vestigation, suggested that this necessity for the fracturing
of the crust was the only serious hindrance to crust displace-
ments in response to centrifugal effects. He wrote:
       For your theory it is only essential that an excentrically situated
     mass rising above the mean level of the earth-surface is producing a
     centrifugal   momentum                 on the rigid crust of the earth. The
                                        acting
     earth-crust   would change           position through even a very small cen-
                                             its

     trifugal force if        the crust would be of spheric symmetry. The only
     force that I can see   which can prevent such sliding motion of the
     crust   the ellipsoidic form of the crust (and of the fluid core). This
             is

     form gives to the crust a certain amount of stability which allows the
     dislocation of the crust only if the centrifugal momentum has a cer-
     tain magnitude. The dislocation may then occur and be accompanied

     by a break of the         crust.    .    .    .
                                                       (128).

Campbell, visualizing the sliding of the crust, perceived that
a bursting stress would be caused in the crust when parts of
it were displaced toward or across the
                                            equatorial region,
where the diameter of the earth is greater. It became possible
to visualize        it   in the     manner suggested by Campbell           in the
346                EARTH'S SHIFTING CRUST
lower left-hand drawing of Figure XIV.    The drawing shows,
in black, two wedge-shaped cross sections representing the
earth's equatorial bulge, or that part of it
                                               underlying the
areas of the crust moving equatorward in the
                                                 displacement.
Half of the bulge is, in fact, involved; the other half under-
liesthe areas of the crust being simultaneously
                                                     displaced
poleward, but these do not affect the point at issue.
     Thereader will note that the equatorial bulge of the earth
is
  represented in this drawing as lying underneath the crust,
so that the crust is not a part of it. This is a new
                                                     way of visu-
alizing the bulge,   introduced  by Campbell,    and justified by
him on  the ground that since the earth's crust is of the same
general thickness all over the earth regardless of latitude
(even though it may be of differing thicknesses from place to




                                  POLAR AX 5
                                          1




Fig. XIII.   A Cross Section   of the Earth Showing the Relation Between
             the Crust   and the Equatorial Bulge
                         CAMPBELL       S   MECHANISM                         347




                 NORTH POLE
          CROSS SECTION OF EARTH   ON
                     96* EAST



Fig.   XIV.    Various Aspects of the   Wedge   Effect

The Antarctic continent is shown, with center of gravity displaced to
the right, on a line representing the $6th degree of East Longitude. The

figure at the right represents the continuation of the movement of the
icecap along this meridian, mounting the bulge, which must be visualized
three-dimensionally. The lower left-hand figure shows the vertical cross
section of the earth under the icecap, with the two wedges pushing the
crust out as    it    approaches the equator. The proportions of the wedges
ate shown,     and an equilibrium of equal and opposite pressures        is   indi-
cated.   The   tangential pull of the icecap     is   indicated by the suspended

weight.



place,    and under mountains,              continents,    and ocean    basins),
then the differences in the polar and equatorial diameters of
                        EARTH'S SHIFTING CRUST




                                        P       PRESSURE OF ICECAP      7.5   I   o'* SHORT   TON8
                                        b   -   DEPTH OF WEDGE            6.0        MILK*
                                        Q pwesauRt        AGAINST   '




                                                                        A.73IO 4MORT TONS
       CONVENTIONAL                             LITHOSPHCRE
       TYPE OF WEDGE:




         CROSS SECTION OF EARTH AT
                 96



Fig.   XV.    The Wedge        Effect



the earth are accounted for by differences in the thicknesses
of the layers underlying the crust, and the bulge itself repre-
sents added matter in the subcrustal layers in the equatorial

regions.
   The       bulge, viewed in this
                              way as lying beneath the crust
appeared     form
                to  two  wedges against which the crust had
to be displaced by the centrifugal thrust of the icecap. Camp
bell reached the conclusion that to estimate the bursting
stress produced on the crust in the equatorial region, il
would be necessary             to apply the mechanical principle of the
                          CAMPBELL'S MECHANISM                       349

wedge, which has the effect of multiplying the effect of an
applied force. This principle is usually given as follows:

    The wedge is a pair of inclined planes united by their bases. In the
  application of pressure to the head or butt end of the wedge, to
  cause it to penetrate a resisting body, the applied force is to the
  resistance as the thickness of the wedge is to its length (249:512).


  This statement means that a wedge multiplies the splitting
power (or bursting stress) produced by an applied force in
the proportion of the length of the wedge to its thickness at
the butt end. Figure            XV
                          shows the application of this prin-
ciple to the earth. The  formula  for calculating the wedge
effect   is                                   = pressure (as
         presented at the extreme left, where P
                                            Q = the mutual
thrust of the icecap transmitted to the crust),

pressure between crust and bulge, or bursting      h = thestress,

height (that  the length) of the wedge, and b = the base or
                    is,

butt end.       The       bursting stress equals the pressure applied to
the butt       and multiplied by the        ratio of the thickness of the
butt end to the length of the wedge. The length of the wedge,
in this case, is about 6,000 miles, and its thickness at the butt
end is 6.67 miles, so that the ratio is about 1,000:1, and the
quantity of the thrust of the icecap should consequently be
multiplied by 1,000; however, there are two wedges, one on
each side of the earth, and therefore the thrust is multiplied
only 500 times. Nevertheless, the significance of such a multi-
plication of the effect of the icecap is self-evident.
  It was not a simple matter to apply the principle of the

wedge         to the earth.     As in the    case of the principle of the

parallelogram, the formula could not simply be copied from
a textbook; it had to be imaginatively applied. For example,
in the diagram P, or pressure, is shown exerted on the butt
end, like a sledge hammer hitting the butt end of a wedge to
split a log. But obviously, the thrust of the icecap is not, in
the first instance, applied in this way. It takes an act of the

imagination to realize that in effect it amounts to the same
thing.        The   icecap   pushing or pulling the crust
                               is   really
toward the equator on both sides of the earth, but the matter
350                 EARTH'S SHIFTING CRUST

may  just as well be looked at in the opposite way, as if the
icecap and crust stood still, or were under no horizontal
pressure, but force was being applied to the butt end of the
wedge. Either way, the mathematics is the same. Campbell's
application of this principle to the problem of estimating the
bursting stress on the crust was discussed with physicists, in-
cluding Frankland, Bridgman, and Einstein         (see below),       none
of whom questioned its soundness.
  After finding the quantity of the total      stress   on   the earth's
crust produced by the centrifugal effect transmitted from
the icecap, Campbell reduced it to pressure per square inch
by dividing it into the number of square inches in a cross
section of the earth's crust, assuming an average thickness of
the crust of about 40 miles. This estimate of the crust's thick-
ness   is                  some writers, including Umbgrove,
            a liberal one, since

suggest that it may be no more than half as much. Since a
lesser thickness for the crust would mean a higher figure for
the bursting stress per square inch, an error in this direction
here    may    serve to counter the effect of the possible partial
isostatic     compensation of the icecap, which we have disre-
garded in the tentative calculation of its centrifugal effect.
Thus, if half the icecap is isostatically compensated, but the
crust is only 20 miles thick, then Campbell's estimate of the

pressure per square inch will be unchanged.
   Campbell found that the bursting stress on the crust per
square inch amounted to about 1,700 pounds (see p. 361). In
comparison with this, I found that the crushing point of
basalt at the earth's surface has been estimated, from labora-

tory experiments, at 2,500 pounds. A number of points must
be considered in reaching conclusions regarding the possible
significance of these comparative figures. First, the crushing
strength of any rock is considered to be higher than its
tensile, or breaking strength. Thus, the tensile strength of
basalt, the principal constituent of the earth's crust, is proba-
bly considerably closer to the estimated quantity of the
bursting stress.      A     second important consideration      is   that
the earth's crust      is
                            unequal in thickness and strength from
                          CAMPBELLS MECHANISM                                       351

place to place,           andeverywhere penetrated by deep frac-
                                is

tures. It      would naturally fail at its weakest point. As we shall
see below, Einstein, in view of these facts, said that       he would
be    satisfied as to        the plausibility of the mechanics of this

theory    if   the ratio of the bursting stress to the strength of the
crust was 1:100.            Theshown by Campbell is very
                                     ratio as
much closer than the ratio demanded by Einstein. It seems
therefore reasonable to suppose that at some point of the
future growth of the icecap, which is now, it appears, still
growing, the crust              may respond          to the increasing bursting
stress by fracturing. When this occurs, it may be expected
that a process will begin of gradual fracturing and folding of
the crust, accompanied by the beginning of its displacement
over the underlying layers.
  Campbell has pointed out that no very great force                            is   re-

quired                   widespread fracturing of the crust
            to accomplish a

during a displacement. At the first local failure of the crust
in response to the bursting stress, the stress will be relieved
at that point, tobecome effective immediately at an adjacent
point.    Thus
             the fracture will travel through the crust with-
out the application of additional force. From this it is clear
that the steady application of a small force would suffice to
fracture the crust to a great distance. In his conversation with
Einstein,       an account of whichgiven below, Campbell gave
                                                is

a convincing illustration of this principle.
   The ability of the crust to resist fracture is slight. Jeffreys
found that a         strain equal to the weight of a layer of rock 2,200
feet in height            would      fracture   it   to   its   full
                                                         depth (238:202).
It is clear that          the tensile strength of the crust does not com-

pare with           its crushing strength, which, also according to
Jeffreys,      is   sufficient to enable it to transmit mountain-mak-

ing              any distance. Campbell visualizes the proc-
       stresses to

ess of crust displacement not as a continuous movement but
as a staged movement resulting from an interaction alter-

nately of the direct thrust of the icecap                        and of the bursting
stress.   He    writes:
352                    EARTH'S SHIFTING CRUST
       .    .There are two distinctly separate functions performed by the
                .


     mass of the icecap.   .   The first is the centrifugal momentum caus-
                               .   .




     ing the lithosphere to change its position in relation to the poles. .  .   .



     When the lithosphere comes to a standstill for want of a sufficient
     force, the second function of the icecap gets busy and builds up a

     pressure of tremendous potential, five hundred times the force pro-
     duced by the icecap, and will continue to add to this pressure at the
     rate of five   hundred times the increasing pressure of the growing
     icecap, until it finally splits the lithosphere.   Then   the pressure will

     drop, and the first function will take hold,       and once again  start to
     move  the lithosphere. This alternate action will continue to take

     place until the icecap is destroyed. . .    .



       . .  The wedge does, not multiply the power of the centrifugal
                .




     momentum,      as such.   The power     disposed for the movement of the
     lithosphere remains the same as         it always has been, but the static

     pressure that will fracture the lithosphere, thereby permitting the
     centrifugal momentum of the icecap to start moving the lithosphere,
     will    be multiplied by 500.
       The wedge       has been functioning ever since the  first permanent

     snow fell on the Antarctic continent; it is functioning today. ... At
     the same time, die centrifugal momentum of the icecap is just stand-
     ing by, waiting for the lithosphere to fracture and be released for the
     journey toward the equator.       The   tensile strain will fade   away with
     the faulting of the lithosphere, but should the fractures freeze up
     again from any cause, the tensile strain will tend to build up again,
     and the same series of actions will repeat themselves (66).

     We
      saw that the process that destroyed the Wisconsin ice*
cap was several times interrupted and renewed in alternating
withdrawals and readvances of the ice, which we have ex-
plained as resulting from episodes of massive volcanism.
These phases appear to correspond to the alternating phases
of the process of displacement as suggested by Campbell,
which would naturally have been accompanied by volcanic
activity.




4.    Some Difficulties

A    number of objections have been raised, in the course of
consultations with specialists, to the mechanism of displace-
                   CAMPBELL'S MECHANISM                                           353

ment suggested by Campbell. We have considered these ob-
jections, and they do not appear formidable. I am summariz-
ing some of these in the following pages, in order that the
reader      may know,any of these have occurred to him, that
                        if

they have already been given consideration.
  a. The question of friction with the subcrustal layer. It

may at first appear that friction would be a powerful brake
on any extensive displacement of the crust, and unquestion-
ably it would have an effect. Yet there are several mechanical
factors that     could aid a displacement.                    A    leading considera-
tion   that the suggested movement is
       is                                                          a gliding motion.
Gliding is the most economical form of motion. It has        been
said, in fact,   that gliding constitutes an ideal form of motion
that utilizes    100 per cent of energy, as opposed to the sphere
and the  cylinder, which, being round, lose 30 per cent of
their energy in rotation, which reduces their speed consider-

ably. Frankland has suggested that a rise of temperature at
the interface of the crust and the lower layer, as the result
of friction, could facilitate a displacement.                         Campbell con-
siders that the underlayer, or asthenosphere, would act more
like a lubricant than a retardant. He compares the movement
to the      motion of   ice floes: ".            .   .   Observe how vast    fields   of
ice are started in      motion           just by the friction of the         wind on
the surface of the ice.     Again, you will see
                                     .   .   .                              the same
                 a
thing by visiting pond  where they are cutting ice. You will
see men pushing around blocks of ice of three or four hun-
dred square feet with the greatest ease                       as    long as the ice   is

floating in the water.   ."  .   .



   b. The question of the extent of the displacement. It has
been questioned whether a displacement of the crust might
not terminate at an early stage because of the melting of
the icecap as it moves into lower latitudes. Campbell, how-
ever, has pointed out that as the icecap moves equatorward
from a polar region, the ice will continue to accumulate on
the rear or poleward side,                   and     that this will have the effect
of prolonging the motion of the crust. In some circumstances,
if the
       icecap happened to be situated on a very large land
354                EARTH'S SHIFTING CRUST
mass, this might mean a long continuation of the movement.
An icecap in Eurasia might move the crust a great distance.
It is obvious that a natural point for the termination of the
movement        be the arrival of an oceanic area at the pole,
              will
so that the rearward build-up of the ice is brought to an end.
This would appear to have happened in the last movement,
when the southward shift of North America seems to have
brought the Arctic Ocean into the polar zone.
   c. The question of the possible suspension of movements

if both poles should happen to be situated in oceans. This is
one of the more important objections that have been raised
to Campbell's mechanism of displacement. Yet, it appears
that it is much less formidable a difficulty than it seemed at
first glance. It might be supposed that the eventuality of

having both poles in water areas would be certain to occur;
that is, it would have occurred early in the earth's history,
and would have stopped crust displacements by putting an
end to the formation of great polar icecaps. However, a
further examination of this objection reveals weaknesses in it.
  In the first place, the very peculiar placing of the conti-
nents with respect to the ocean basins renders such an event
almost impossible. All the six continents are placed dia-
metrically opposite oceans on the other side of the globe.
Ninety-five per cent of all the land on the globe lies opposite
water. Moreover, the oceans are surrounded by continental
                                            and there are
shelves that extend for considerable distances,
island areas in the oceans where the water               is   comparatively
shallow.     We   have seen       that,   according to   Gutenberg, any
part of the earth's surface moved poleward by a crust dis-
placement would stand higher relatively to sea level. Any
area   now
         near the equator would be raised considerably if
moved to a pole, by reason of the variation of gravity alone,
while other factors might add to the vertical movement
(Chapters IV, V, VI). Displacements could result in raising
the continental shelves, shallow seas, and island areas above
sea level.   The two        or three displacements of the crust in the
same direction       that    would be required to move any area from
               CAMPBELL'S MECHANISM                            355

near the equator to the vicinity of a pole might produce
major increases in elevation. Finally, it would be necessary for
both poles to be so far away from the nearest land      as to pre-

vent the growth of icecaps on any side, for an icecap formed
all on one side of a pole and at a considerable distance from

itwould have a very great centrifugal effect proportionately
toits size. Campbell carried out a series of careful measure-

ments of the globe to find out how many possibilities actually
exist at the present time for the location of both poles in
water. He found that there is only one such position, where
one pole would be in the South Atlantic and the other in the
North Pacific between the Marshalls and the Carolines. But
the latter area, in the course of its displacement from its pres-
ent latitude to the vicinity of a pole, could easily be raised
above sea level.
  It cannot be denied, despite this, that there exists a real

possibility that at various times   during the history of the
globe both  poles have been, in fact, situated in oceanic areas.

Unquestionably, this would have resulted in the temporary
cessation of the formation of great polar icecaps, and there-
fore of displacements of the crust. However, there is no rea-
son to conclude that this would have meant a permanent
cessation of crust displacements.      We  must not forget that
Gold has suggested a mechanism         by which a shift of 90 de-
grees in the positions of the poles could occur in periods of a
million years. In this way a period without crust displace-
ment could be ended by the gradual movement of a new land
area to a pole. It is even quite possible that the accumulation
of inequalities of mass within the crust itself, as the result of
erosion or of igneous processes, might eventually produce a
displacement without the agency of an icecap.
     The question as to why the postulated centrifugal effect
     d.

has not prevented the accumulation of the icecap. One com-
mentator has pointed to the well-known fact that ice flows
outward in   all directions      from a central point or points,
through the effects of   its   own weight, and has argued that the
centrifugal effect should operate to     make   the icecap flow off
356                     EARTH'S SHIFTING CRUST
into the sea rather than to bring about a transfer of centrif-
ugal momentum from the icecap to the crust. This objection
has a certain plausibility at                first   glance,   and   yet   it is   invalid
for the following reason.               We know that according to classical
mechanics any mass deposited upon the earth's surface (pro-
vided that surface           is   already in gravitational equilibrium) will
be acted upon by the earth's rotation, and will give rise to a
centrifugal effect. So much cannot be denied. It is also true
that the resulting centrifugal                  momentum                 upon the
                                                                  will act
ice    and can be expected                  to accelerate to       some degree the
rate of flow of the ice in the direction of the thrust (not in
all directions).In the case of the present Antarctic icecap
this   might mean a               slightly increased rate of flow across the
broadest section of the continent, in the direction of the
meridian of 96   E. Long, (see the map of Antarctica, Intro-
duction, p. 18). However, the crux of the matter is, obviously,
the ratio of the rate of flow to the rate of accumulation of the
ice. It is clear,       on   the one hand, that           new
                                               until brought      ice,
within the equilibrium surface of the globe by isostatic ad-
justment, must give rise to centrifugal effects; and on the
other hand      quite clear that, despite this, the icecap has
               it is

continued to accumulate. Why does it happen that the cen-
trifugal effect does not produce a flow-off of ice from the
continent at a rate equal to the rate of accumulation? The
answer to this is, obviously, that ice presents considerable
resistance to flow. It flows only under considerable pressure,
and is otherwise a solid. Moreover, in Antarctica, and pre-
sumably in any polar icecap, the prevailing low temperatures
cause the ice to have increased rigidity. It is also thought that
the ice below the superficial layers of a great ice sheet is stag-
nant, and that only the upper layers move. This means that
the ice that       is   in contact with the              ground      is    fixed to the
earth's surface.        The        viscosity,   or   stiffness,   of the ice in turn
means     that a drag      imparted by the upper layers to the
                                  is

lower    layers,   and by them to the underlying crust. Thus the
centrifugal    momentum                is   transmitted to the crust. Finally,
the supposition of the gliding off of the icecap                           is   rendered
                     CAMPBELL'S MECHANISM                               357

more improbable by the uneven topography of the continent
and especially by the great fringing mountain ranges. We
have cited Einstein's opinion that the flow-off of ice from
Antarctica in the form of icebergs is an insignificant percent-
age of the annual ice accumulation.
  e.   The    question as to whether the centrifugal effect postu-
lated in this theory exists at all. Some commentators have

rejected the idea that a large total centrifugal effect may be
created by the asymmetric accumulation of an icecap. They
have agreed only to the existence of a centrifugal effect that
may be created if the center of mass of an object is elevated
above the equilibrium surface of the earth. This has been
termed the Eotvos effect. It does not depend upon the exist-
ence of excess mass at a point.           It   may be   illustrated   by an
iceberg floating in water.    The    ice is in gravitational balance,

having displaced its weight of water. But one tenth of its
weight is above the surface of the water. The center of its
mass is therefore higher than the center of the displaced
water. If the center of      its   mass   is   further from the earth's
center,    it is   now moving around      the earth's center at a faster
rate. It   has been accelerated,     and the tangential component
                               move it toward the equator.
of the acceleration will tend to
  This concept is well known in geophysics, and conse-
quently it has been the customary mode of considering any
question involving centrifugal effects on the earth's surface.
But the              may arise from an accumulation of ice
            effects that

that has not been brought within the equilibrium surface of
the earth by isostatic adjustment, and which therefore con-
stitutes an accumulation of excess mass at a point on the

surface, have not received equal attention. I have already
mentioned the fact that the idea came to both Bridgman and
Daly as a new idea, and one that seemed to them worth in-
vestigating. Because of the special            importance of   this issue,
I am presenting a more detailed discussion of it below.

   f. The
          question as to whether the crust is strong enough
to transmit the centrifugal momentum of the icecap. A num-
358              EARTH'S SHIFTING CRUST
ber of consultants have been in doubt on this point because
of their knowledge that the crust       is,  from certain points of
view, very weak. It has   little tensile   strength, and as a conse-
quence cannot bear heavy loads without fracturing or giving
way by plastic flow. However, tensile strength and crushing
strength are two very different things. A bar made of a brittle
but hard substance will have little tensile strength, but con-
siderable force may be required to crush it. The rocks com-

posing the earth's crust are highly rigid, and therefore, de-
spite the fact that they have little tensile strength, such as
would be required to contain vertical stresses, they have
enormous strength to resist horizontally applied compressive
stresses. They simply cannot be compressed to any extent,

and only an enormous force will produce plastic flow. The
rocks of the crust are so rigid (despite the fact that they do,
of course, possess a certain small degree of elasticity) that the

penetration of the crust by fractures does not seriously mod-
ify its power to transmit horizontal or tangential stresses.
There    geological evidence in the mountain systems, in the
        is


planetary fracture systems, in the great globe-encircling can-
yon system recently discovered by Ewing, that stresses have
been applied to the earth's crust as a whole, and various geol-
ogists, including Hobbs and Umbgrove, have made state-
ments to that effect.
  A   proper understanding of    thisquestion requires that the
magnitude of the stress and its     mode of application should
be considered. An enormous pressure per square inch, espe-
cially if applied all at once, might cause local deformation of
the crust by bringing about rock flow, as it has been sug-
gested by Bridgman (p. 189), but the stresses that we suppose
to derive from the icecap are not of this order, nor do they
reach their   maximum intensity until after a period of gradual
growth during which they could be transmitted to the crust
as a whole.    Theicecap produces a gentle pressure, slowly
growing and steadily applied over a considerable length of
time, incapable of radically deforming the crust adjacent to
                       CAMPBELL'S MECHANISM                                    359

itself,   but capable of exerting a persistent push on the earth's
crust.
        were possible to exhaust the centrifugal effect of the
     If it

icecap by the absorption of energy in a local deformation of
the crust, the matter might wear a different aspect. But we
are to       remember     that, if the yielding of the crust          or   its dis-

placement       as a   whole allows the displacement of the
                                                       mass              ice
farther from the axis of rotation, the centrifugal effect is
thereby multiplied. In these circumstances the centrifugal
momentum cannot be absorbed locally, but must be trans-
mitted to the entire crustal shell of the earth.
  Jeffreys has remarked that the earth's crust can transmit
mountain-building          stresses to   any distance (238: 2



5.   The     Calculations


The   following are the calculations of the centrifugal effect
of the present Antarctic icecap, and of the resulting bursting
stress on the crust, as worked out by Campbell. The phraseol-

ogy is in part that of Dr. John M. Frankland, of the Federal
Bureau of Standards, who was kind enough                         to review these
calculations.


a.   Calculation of the Centrifugal Effect of the Rotation of
     the Antarctic Icecap:

Assume        isostatic   adjustment     o,   center of gravity of the ice-
cap 345 miles from the polar axis,                 and volume of the ice
equal to 6,000,000 cubic miles.
     W = Weight of the icecap =                2.500   X    1Ql6 short tons.

     F    = Centrifugal effect in pounds =                   ,   where
                                                       gR
     v        Velocity of revolving icecap, 132 feet per second,
     R = Distance from the axis of rotation to the center of
         gravity of the icecap = 345 miles = 1,821,600 feet,
     g = Acceleration due to gravity = 32.
360                     EARTH'S SHIFTING CRUST

     F   _ Wv _    2
                          2.5      X    i
                                              16
                                                   X
            gR                   32    X      1,821,600
            43*870.75          X      iQ 16    _
                58,291,200
            7.5    Xl
                      12
                         short tons                    =   6.8    X       l
                                                                               12
                                                                                    metric tons,
                                                                              12
            total centrifugal effect,                  6.8       X    l             metric tons,
            radial force tangential to the earth's surface,

            6.8    X    1C)2   metric tons (see            p. 343).

This, of course, is an upper estimate, which                                   may be       too large

by a factor of two or three.

b.    Calculation of the Bursting Stresses on the Lithosphere:

An  approximation of the bursting stress caused by this cen-
trifugal effect can be reached by simple methods as follows.
More elaborate approaches hardly seem justified in view of the
uncertainty of the magnitude of the centrifugal force.
  It is assumed that the entire resistance to the motion of

the lithosphere arises from the fact that the earth is not a

perfect sphere, but is an oblate spheroid. The tangential, or
shearing, stresses between the lithosphere and the underlying
asthenosphere are considered negligible because of the time
factor, and because of the assumed viscosity of the astheno-

sphere. If one considers the great circle passing through the
center of gravity of the icecap, at right angles to the meridian
of centrifugal thrust of the icecap,                        it is     evident that the           cir-

cumference of           this great circle will              be increased              if   the icecap
is
  displaced away from the pole. Of course, any stress system
that arises in this way will be two-dimensional, but one will

hardly be in error by a factor of more than two, if one neg-
lects the two-dimensional character of the stresses and as-

sumes instead that they are uniaxial. The only purpose of
this computation is, of course, to show the order of mag-
nitude of the          effect.

     With      kind of approximation, one may view the equa-
            this
torial   bulge as a kind of wedge up which the lithosphere is
                  CAMPBELL'S MECHANISM                                 361

being pushed. There           are, of course,     two wedges, one on each
side of the globe.
  The bursting stress is the product of the tangential effect
of the icecap by the ratio of the gradient of the bulge:

   (1) Thickness of bulge (wedge) at its butt end nn 6.67 miles.

   (2) Ratio of travel to lift, of bulge wedge             =
                                                  6, 152: 6.67

     (3) Stress,on  cross section of the lithosphere (taken as

         40 miles thick)      =
                            7.5   1Ql2 X 6,152    X
                                        6.67     X2
     = 34588 X       1Ql5 short tons.

     _ 34588 X
     ~               io 15
                             = 3-5 X   io 7
            5
          99> 8 94
     short tons per sq. mi.

       Approximately 1,700         Ibs.    per   sq. in.




6.   Notes of a Conference with Einstein

In January, 1955, Mr. Campbell and I had the privilege of
a conference with Einstein at which a number of important
questions relating to the theory were discussed. Subsequently,
I prepared the following statement, which I submitted to

him    for his approval.      He approved
                                        an accurate report of
                                                 it   as
our discussion, but he desired that it should not be inter-
preted as an official endorsement on his part of Mr. Camp-
bell's calculations in detail, which he had had insufficient

opportunity to study. Those present at the meeting included
Dr. Einstein, Mr. Campbell, Mrs. Mary G. Grand, and myself.
   After the introductory remarks, Mr. Hapgood explained
to Dr. Einstein that while, in the
                                development of the theory,
he had himself been concerned mainly with the field evi-
dence in geology and paleontology, Mr. Campbell had con-
tributed the basic concepts in mechanics and geophysics.
  Mr. Hapgood explained further that Mr. Campbell's cal-
culations had now advanced to a point where he felt that a
consultation     was necessary.            The     principal   question was
362                   EARTH'S SHIFTING CRUST
whether the tangential portion of the centrifugal effect re-
sulting from the rotation of the icecap was of the correct
order of magnitude to cause fracturing of the earth's rigid
crust. Dr. Einstein had stated in a letter to Mr. Hapgood

that, owing to the oblate shape of the earth, the crust could
not be displaced without fracturing and that the tensile
strength of the crust, opposing such fracturing, was the only
force he could see that could prevent a displacement of the
crust.He had already suggested, therefore, that it would be
necessary to compare the bursting stresses proceeding from
the icecap with the available data on the strengths of the
crustal rocks.
  It     was   this   problem that now, through the calculations
made by Mr. Campbell, seemed     to be solved.
  Mr. Campbell explained to Dr. Einstein the principles he
had followed in making the calculations. He used photostatic
drawings as illustrations. He showed that the crust, in at-
tempting to pass over the equatorial bulge of the earth,
would be stretched to a slight degree. A bursting stress would
arise that would tend to tear the crust apart. This stress
would in all probability exceed the elastic limit of the crustal
rocks: that is, they would tend to yield by fracture, if the
stress was great enough. Dr. Einstein said, Yes, but he won-
dered how an equilibrium of force would be created? Mr.
Campbell pointed out that two equal and opposite pressures
would arise, since, at the same time, on two opposite sides
of the globe, two opposite sectors or quadrants of the crust
would be attempting to cross the bulge.
   Dr. Einstein agreed that this was reasonable, but raised the
question of the behavior of the semiliquid underlayer of the
bulge, under pressure from the rigid crust. After some dis-
cussion it was agreed that this underlayer, despite its lack of
strength, would not be displaced, because of the effect of the
centrifugal     momentum of the    earth.
   Mr. Campbell then explained the application of a prin-
ciple by which the tangential stress proceeding from the ice-
cap was greatly magnified. He considered that the bulge of
                      CAMPBELL'S MECHANISM                                   363

the earth, starting with zero thickness at the poles, and

proaching 6.67 miles in thickness at the equator, behaved
physically as a wedge resisting the movement of the crust.
Since the distance from pole to equator is about 6,000 miles,
the ratio of this wedge was 1,000:1; but the existence of two
wedges on opposite sides of the globe reduced the ratio to
500:1. The icecap's tangential effect, multiplied by 500, and
divided by the number of square inches of the cross section
of the lithospheric shell at the equator (assuming the crust
to be 40 miles thick), produced a bursting stress on that shell
of 1,738 pounds per square inch. After examining each step
in the argument twice Dr. Einstein had the impression that
the principles were right,              and that the       effects   were of the
right order of magnitude.               He   stated that   he would be     satis-

fied if the bursting stress      and the strength of the crust were
in the ratio of not         more than 1:100, since the crust varied
so greatly in         strength from place to place, and would un-
doubtedly yield at its weakest point.
  Mr. Campbell explained an effect he had often observed,
which illustrated the process by which the crust might yield
to fracture.       A common method of splitting a block of granite
is   to drill      two small   holes,   about    six inches apart, near the
center of the long axis of the granite, and insert and drive
home a wedge in each hole,                   A
                                  bursting stress of sufficient
magnitude  is brought to bear to split the rock. However, the
rock    is   not                    Enough stress is brought to bear
                   split all at once.
to start a fracture,        but the fracture does not take place in-
stantaneously. If the wedges are put in place in the evening,
it will be found next morning that the whole rock has been

split   evenly along a line extending through the two holes.
The  fracture has slowly migrated through the rock during
the night. The force required to split rock in this way is but
a fraction of that required to split it all at once. So far as the
earth's crust is concerned, what is required is not a force suf-
ficient to split it all at once,   but simply a force sufficient to
initiate      a fracture or fractures, which will then gradually
364                EARTH'S SHIFTING CRUST
extend themselves during possibly considerable periods of
time.
   Mr. Hapgood next described the geological evidence of
world-wide fracture systems extending through the crust, and
weakening it, and the remarkable similarity of these patterns
to those which, theoretically, would result from a movement
of the crust. Dr. Einstein expressed the keenest interest in
this evidence.
  Mr. Hapgood referred to the Hough-Urry findings of the
dates of climatic change in Antarctica during the Pleistocene.
Dr. Einstein stated that the method of radioactive dating de-
veloped by       W.
                 D. Urry was sound and reliable. As a re-
sult, Dr. Einstein was in full agreement that the data from

Antarctica, indicating that that continent enjoyed a tem-
perate climate at a time when a continental icecap lay over
much   of North America, virtually compel the conclusion that
a shift of the earth's entire crust must have taken place.
  Dr. Einstein asked Mr. Hapgood what objections geologists
had been making to the theory. Mr. Hapgood replied that
it was principally a question of the number of such move-

ments, Urry's evidence would imply four such displacements
at irregular intervals during the last 50,000 years. 1 Dr. Ein-
stein replied that this            be a large number. How-
                              seemed     to

ever, he said, if the evidence could not be explained in any
other way, even this large number would have to be accepted.
The                      common in geology were, in his
        gradualistic notions
opinion, merely a habit of mind, and were not necessarily

justified   by the empirical     data.
   At   this   point the discussion turned to astronomy. Mr.               Hap-
good did not understand          why men who would              boggle at the
rate of change required by the theory of crustal movements

thought nothing of accepting the view that the entire uni-
verse   had been created     an hour. Dr. Einstein said that,
                             in half

unfortunately, the evidence seemed to point that way. After
iThis figure was subsequently revised, in the light of      much   geological evi-
dence (Chs. VII, VIII, IX), to three displacements in the   last 130,000 years.
                    CAMPBELL'S MECHANISM                           365

considerable discussion he added that          itwas not, however,
necessary to take the present state         of our knowledge very

seriously. Future developments might show us how to reach
a different conclusion from the evidence. Much that we re-
gardas knowledge today may someday be regarded as error.
  Toward the end of the interview Dr. Einstein indicated a
number of points where further research would be desirable.
He suggested the need for a gravitational study of the Antarc-
tic   continent,    andfor a study of the rates of crustal adjust-
ment     to increasing or decreasing loads of ice. He commented

upon     the difficulties that confront those who wish to intro-
duce new theories, and quoted Planck's remark that theories
change not because anybody gets converted but because those
who hold the old theories eventually die off.


7.    Isostasy   and Centrifugal   Effect


As I have mentioned, there is a possibility of two points of

view regarding the particular centrifugal effect postulated
by Campbell and myself. It is therefore necessary to provide
additional clarification of     some of the points    at issue.   To   a
certain extent     may be a question of a situation in which
                    it

new definitions or clearer definitions of accustomed terms
are called for, but it also appears to us that in some cases, at
least, physicists whom we have consulted in the course of our
work are proceeding upon the           basis of assumptions that are
in conflict with ours. Therefore,       it is necessary to re-examine

these assumptions.        A comprehensive   discussion of the matter
must begin with a review of the broader questions of the
mechanics of rotation already briefly referred to in the In-
troduction.
      The
        existence of a very common misunderstanding re-
garding the mechanics of the earth's rotation, particularly
related to the problem of the stability of the poles, was made
clear tome by a difference of opinion that          arose at the be-
ginning of my inquiry. Brown, whose work            was the starting
366                           EARTH'S SHIFTING CRUST

point of     own, was an engineer, and his concepts of the
                       my
earth's motions were based upon simple mechanics. He un-
derstood gyroscopic action, and the stabilizing role of the rim
of a rotating flywheel.                He   also   understood the laws of cen-
trifugal effect as applied to weights eccentric to the axes of
spin of rotating bodies. It was my good fortune that Camp-
bell,         who was        to carry the   work forward,            also   was a mechan-
ical engineer.
      Brown had made                the statement that          it   was the equatorial
bulge of the globe that stabilized                     it   with reference to the axis
of rotation; he                         rim of a flywheel. I
                               had compared       it   to the
found that this statement was  disputed by some physicists.
The physicists suggested that the stability of the earth on
its      was not owing to the centrifugal effect of the rota-
          axis
tion of the equatorial bulge alone, but to that of the rotation
of the entire mass of the earth. Later I discovered a passage
in    Coleman               that appeared to express their point of view:

    It may be suggested that the earth is a gyroscope, and, as such, has

  a very powerful tendency to keep its axis of rotation pointing con-
  tinuously in the same direction. Any sudden change in the direction
  would probably wreck the world completely                     (87:263).

      I       wished to obtain a clear statement of the rights of                      this
matter. Accordingly, I corresponded with specialists,                                 who
eventually referred me to the works of James Clerk                                    Max-
well, inone of whose papers I found the following statement
in support of Brown's position:

          .   .   .   The permanence                           on the in-
                                       of latitude essentially depends

  equality of the earth's axes, for   they had
                                             ifall been equal, any altera-
  tion of the crust of the earth   would have produced new principal
  axes, and the axis of rotation would travel round about those axes,
  altering the latitudes of all places, and yet not in the least altering
  the position of the axis of rotation             among       the stars (296:261).


For the word "axes" in the second line we may read "diame-
ters," and of course Maxwell is referring to the inequality
of the polar and equatorial diameters, that is, to the existence
of the equatorial bulge, to which, therefore, he directly at-
                  CAMPBELL'S MECHANISM                                  367

tributes the stability of the earth on its axis of rotation.
  Maxwell, in the foregoing passage, suggests that in the ab-
sence of the equatorial bulge, any change in the crust (mean-
ing, it is clear, the creation of any protuberance or excess
weight at any point) would change the position of the planet
on the   axis of rotation.   Even before      I   located this passage in
Maxwell, a peculiar device designed by Brown had made this
principle clear to me by observation. This device consisted
of a globe mounted on three trunnions in such a way that it
could rotate in any direction. The globe was a perfect sphere
and had no equatorial bulge. It was suspended by a string
to an overhead point. To rotate this sphere, all that was

necessary was to wind it up and then let it go. Brown had a
weight attached to the South Pole of the sphere, and it was
observable that, as soon as the sphere began to rotate rapidly,
the weight was flung to the equator, where it stabilized the
direction of rotation as long as the speed of rotation was
maintained. Later Campbell made a larger model of Brown's
device, which I rotated unweighted, and I observed that it
had no stable axis of spin. Two motions were observable: a
rapid rotation, and a slow, random drifting. It was evident
that the mass of the sphere acted as a stabilizer of the speed
of rotation, but had no influence on its direction. This ex-
periment, strongly confirming Brown's claim, encouraged me
to persist until I could find positive theoretical confirmation
of the observation, which eventually I did in the works of
Maxwell.
   I was amazed and chagrined in this connection to note a

phenomenon which,       nevertheless,    is    as   old as science   itself.

The    professors most of them,   at   any ratewould not come            to
see the device.

     Perhaps I should describe this device in greater detail.
A    trunnion is like a ring or a hoop, made of metal. A globe
is   mounted in this trunnion on two pivots set into the ring
at points opposite each other (180 degrees apart).              Then,     if

the ring is held (as it often is on a model globe) by a pedi-
ment or stand, the globe will rotate. Its axis will be deter-
368                EARTH'S SHIFTING CRUST
mined by the fixed positions of the pivots set into the ring.
  Now, if, instead of fixing the ring into a stand, or pedi-
ment, we set it into another, larger ring, by inserting two
pivots into the larger ring at two points at right angles to
those of the inner ring, we have an axis within an axis, and
the globe can be       made   to rotate in either direction. If a third

ring is used, then the globe has freedom of action in any
direction whatever.
  There     is still   the problem of imparting        momentum        to this

globe. Since it has no fixed axis, this is a difficult problem.
Brown solved it by suspending the device to the ceiling by
a string attached to the outermost trunnion. This string
could be wound up by rotating the outermost trunnion in
one direction by hand for a while, just as a boy may wind
up the rubber bands used to give momentum to a toy air-
plane. Then, when the trunnion is released, the string un-
winds, putting the globe itself in rapid rotation, but a free
rotation, one not confined to a fixed axis.
   In view of continued skepticism, I could not be entirely
satisfied by the Maxwell statement, supported though it

might be by the demonstration. Since I am not myself a
physicist, I felt it not unlikely that some persons would con-
clude that, in the first place, I had misunderstood Maxwell,
and that, in the second place, I was incapable of interpreting
correctly the evidence of my eyes. I therefore wished to ob-
tain an authoritative interpretation of Maxwell's statement,
and, accordingly, I wrote Dr. Harlow Shapley, the Director
of the Harvard Observatory, as follows:

   After a year of intensive work with a group of people here, I have
 concluded that the work we are doing is dependent upon a clear
 answer to the question as to whether the geographical poles are stabi-
 lized   by the   momentum    of rotation of the earth, or solely by that of
 the equatorial bulge. I have had discussions about this with Dr.
 Adams of the Coast and Geodetic Survey, and with Dr. Clemence of
 the Naval Observatory. They have given me references to the work
 of Clerk Maxwell and others, without quite satisfying me. I am not,
 of course, equipped to understand       all   of the technicalities, but I   am
                                CAMPBELL'S MECHANISM                                          369

 hoping that you can give                    me   a steer in nontechnical terms on the gen-
  eral concepts.

     My hunch is that, contrary to a widespread impression, it is the
  bulge alone that stabilizes the geographical poles. As I reason it out,
  if the earth were a
                      perfect sphere, the energy of its rotation, derived
  from its mass in motion, would "stabilize" the speed of the rotation,
  but would have no reference to its direction. If we suppose that some-
  body could reach out from Mars with a pole, and give the earth a
  strong push at an angle of 90 from the direction of rotation, the
  earth would be shifted on the axis of rotation to an extent de-
  termined by the ratio of the force of the push to the mass of the
  earth. In fact, if the earth had no bulge, it would never have stable

  poles, but would rotate every which way.                      .   .   .



    If my view of the matter is sound, important consequences follow,

  but   I   am     not quite certain of the validity of             my      premises.

  Dr. Shapley's reply, dated February                               2,      1951, was, in part,
as follows:

      Dr. [Harold] Jeffreys was fortunately here at the Harvard Ob-
 servatory   and I could turn over your inquiry to him. I now have his
 reply. He says in effect that the fullest discussion of the points men-
  tioned by you is in Routh's Rigid Dynamics, probably in volume I.
  Most textbooks of rigid dynamics will have something about it. The
  theory goes back to Euler. Really both the rotation and the equa-
  torial bulge are needed to maintain stability. Without rotation the

 body could be                  at rest at   any position; with rotation but without the
 equatorial bulge                 it   could rotate permanently about an axis in any
 direction.         .   .   .
                                (343).

With        this   statement             I   decided to rest content.             It    seemed to
me that Brown's position in the matter was correct. Maxwell
showed both by the use of his dynamical top and theoretically
what Brown showed by his device: that a rotating sphere
tends to throw the heaviest weights on its surface to the
equator of spin. Maxwell and, after him, George H. Darwin
recognized that the equatorial bulge of the globe stabilized
the direction of the earth's rotation just as a weight on the
surface of a model sphere would do when the sphere was
rotated rapidly.
  Yet there is a distinct difference between the earth                         and
the   model globe. The                       earth's   approximately round shape is
370                   EARTH'S SHIFTING CRUST
not due to the fact that it is a strong, rigid body, for it is not.
Its roundness is due primarily to the force of gravity, which

in fact holds the earth together. The earth as a whole is a very
weak body, and         if it   were not for the   effect of gravity the cen-

trifugal effect of the rotation     would disrupt the earth and
send     all its   component masses hurtling outwards into inter-
stellar space.
      There   is   also a difference   between the equatorial bulge of
the earth      and a weight attached        to the surface of a      model
globe at its equator of spin. This difference consists in the
fact that the earth's equatorial bulge and the flattenings at
itspoles have been produced by the yielding of the earth's
body in response to the centrifugal effect of its rotation. The
amount of the yielding has been determined by the ratio of
the forces of rotation and gravity. The shape of the earth
thus represents a balance of these two forces, a balance that
is
      perfect, theoretically, at every point of the earth's surface.
It therefore follows that         any unit of material in this balanced
surface will be at rest.          For this reason, such a surface has
been called an equipotential            surface.
      The
       balance of the forces of rotation and gravity at every
point of the earth's surface can be understood also in this
way. The shape of the earth, as we have pointed out, is ob-
late.This means that as you go toward the equator you are
getting farther from the earth's center. In a sense, therefore,
you are going uphill. Likewise, when you are going toward
the poles you are getting closer to the earth's center and
therefore you are going downhill. But we can all see that
it takes no more energy to move toward the
                                            equator than it
does toward a pole. Also, water in the ocean does not run
downhill toward the poles. The earth's surface acts as if it
were perfectly level. The reason for this is that as you go
toward the equator, going uphill, the centrifugal effect of
the earth's rotation increases just enough to compensate for
the gradient, while, if you move toward the poles, the cen-
trifugal effect declines in proportion.             The   forces of gravity
and rotation are therefore balanced, and no centrifugal e-
                       CAMPBELL'S MECHANISM                                  371

        tend to propel a mass in this equipotential surface
feet will
toward the equator, and no gravitational effect will tend to
propel     it   toward the    poles.   The   fact that the force of gravity
is absolutely         much   greater than the centrifugal     effect of the
rotation is shown by the fact that the flattening of the earth
is very slight. The equatorial bulge amounts to 6.7 miles in

comparison with the earth's mean radius of 4,000 miles. This
is   a ratio of only .017 per cent.
     The past century has been notable for extensive studies
of the effects of gravity at the earth's surface. The theory of

isostasy has been developed, and the actually existing state of
balance of the surface features of the earth's crust has been
measured in various ways and for various purposes. As we
have seen, there are various difficulties with the theory of
isostasy, some of which may be soluble in terms of the theory

presented in this book. At the same time, but independently,
studies of centrifugal effects at the earth's surface have been
undertaken. Eotvos investigated the centrifugal effects that
would arise if a given mass had its center of gravity above
the equipotential surface. This could occur even with masses
in isostatic equilibrium. To visualize this case, we may take
the example of a block of ice floating in water.
  Ice is lighter than water. When a block of ice                    falls   into
a body of water it displaces its own weight of water, and
then floats with a tenth of its mass above the water level. It
is   now                   or in isostatic adjustment, even
                in equilibrium,

though its upper part projects a considerable distance up out
of the water. This upper tenth, in the meantime, has dis-

placed air, not water. It is a solid mass of far greater density
than the air it has displaced. Its center of gravity, midway
between         its   summit and the water       surface,   is   farther    from
the axis of rotation of the earth than was that of the mass
of water  it has displaced. Since points move faster with the

earth's rotation the farther they are from this axis, this mass
has now been given added velocity. Added velocity means
an increase in the centrifugal effect, and one not compensated
by gravity, since the amount of mass is the same as before,
372                  EARTH'S SHIFTING CRUST
and therefore the       effect of gravity at that         point has not been
altered.    A   tangential   component          of this   added centrifugal
momentum         will   tend to move         this   ice    mass toward the
equator.
   Eotvos applied this same principle to parts of the earth's
crust. We have seen that, according to the theory of isos-

tasy, mountains and continents are elevated
                                            above the ocean
bottoms because they are composed of lighter materials, and
                                '


they are considered to be 'floating" in an approximate gravi-
tational balance with the heavier crustal formations under
the oceans. Eotvos considered the centrifugal effects that
might   arise from the elevations of the centers of gravity of
continental formations above those of the oceanic sectors of
the crust, and calculated them mathematically. He found
that the effects were comparatively slight. Attempts have
been made to account for the drift of continents through
these effects, but his calculations show they are too small to
have considerable effects. Since Eotvos' time, it has been
generally assumed that any centrifugal effects that were to be
considered in relationship to the earth's crust must be ef-
fects resulting from variations in the vertical position of cen-
ters of gravity of masses in gravitational balance, that is, ele-
vations of these centers above the equipotential surface, or

depressions of them below it, owing to differences in relative
density of the masses involved.
  Let us    now      consider, in connection with this, the effect of
departures of given masses from the state of isostatic or gravi-
tational equilibrium.        We
                           have already seen that there are
remarkable departures from                    some resulting
                                       isostatic balance,
from deformities of the        crust,    and some,
                                            seems, from the
                                                          it

accumulation of icecaps. In these irregularities in the dis-
tribution of matter, resulting from the limited failure of
isostaticadjustment, we must recognize the existence of an-
other surface of the earth, in contradistinction to the equipo-
tential or geoidal surface already              mentioned.     We may    call
this surface the gravitational surface,            or the surface of equal
mass. This      is   a real surface.    It is   not, however, the visible
                 CAMPBELL'S MECHANISM                                 373

surface.   Ahigh plateau may represent an area of deficient
mass, and an ocean basin may represent an area of excess
mass. We have seen that there are many oceanic areas that
show positive isostatic anomalies, or the existence of local
excesses of mass in the earth's crust. We can easily see the
distinction    between the    level equipotential surface of the

geoid, represented by   sea level,     and the   surface of mass that

may deviate considerably       from the    level surface.
  The mechanism    for crust displacement presented in this
book depends upon recognition of the fact that distortions of
mass on the earth's surface, of whatever type, if they consti-
tute    anomalous additions of mass at points on the           earth's
surface, will give rise to centrifugal effects like the effect of
the mass attached to the surface of Brown's rotating model

sphere, in accordance with ordinary principles of mechanics,
and measurable by the standard formula for calculating
centrifugal effects.
  An  example may serve to illustrate the difference between
the surface of mass, which differs in elevation from place to

place, and the equipotential, geoidal surface. Let us take a
fictional case of a mass out of isostatic adjustment but with
itscenter of gravity below the surface of the geoid. Let us
suppose that under the bottom of the Atlantic Ocean we
have a slab of material ten times as dense as basalt, two thou-
sand miles long, one thousand miles wide, and forty miles
thick. The excess of mass in this slab, as compared with other
sectors of the crust, would be enormous, and gravity would
be greater at the surface. Consequently, the ocean level over
this area would be affected slightly, but the shape of the geoid
would not be   significantly changed, and the sea level would
stillrepresent an equipotential surface. The center of grav-
ity of the anomalous mass of high density would be depressed
far below sea level; it might be fifteen or twenty miles below
the geoidal surface. Now if the slab were of average density,
the depression of the center of gravity would mean an in-
verse Eotvos effect, that    is,   a poleward centrifugal   effect,   the
quantity of which, as   we have seen, would be slight.      But, now,
374                 EARTH'S SHIFTING CRUST
to counteract this, the rotation of the earth, acting               on   this

mass of ten times normal density,          would produce a        centrifu-

gal effect ten times as great as the one normally balanced
                                                             at

that point by the effects of gravity. Let us note the fact that
the assumption that this slab       is   not   isostatically   compensated
involves the consequence that the centrifugal                   momentum
resulting from       not compensated.
                     it is

  The difference between an Eotvos effect and one produced
by an uncompensated mass may be illustrated in another
way. Let us return to our example of a mass of ice. Campbell
has suggested the example of an iceberg before and after its
separation from its parent, land-based icecap. It is assumed
that the icecap      is
                          uncompensated.   The     iceberg, breaking off
from the  icecap, falls into the water. Before this event the
icecap, by assumption, is outside the equilibrium surface of
the geoid; the rotation of the earth acts upon it precisely as
the rotation of Brown's         model sphere      acts   upon   the weight
fixed to   its   surface.
  But   let  us see what happens when the iceberg falls into
the sea. It   now reaches gravitational equilibrium. It sinks,
and   displaces its weight in water. It is now a part of the equi-
potential surface of the geoid (though the portion projecting
above sea level is not, and therefore exerts an Eotvos effect).
  Now      what  the quantitative relationship between the
                    is

Eotvos effect and the original centrifugal effect of the ice-
berg? It is plain that now nine tenths of the ice is within
the equilibrium surface. For this nine tenths of the mass the
equatorward centrifugal         momentum produced by             the earth's
rotation   precisely cancelled by the poleward
           is
                                                          component of
the force of gravity at that point, so that there          is no net cen-

               Only one tenth of the ice
trifugal effect.                                     remains to exert an
effect, and the quantity of this effect, furthermore, is de-
termined by the elevation of the center of gravity of this
tenth of the iceberg above sea level. But the elevation has
been enormously reduced. It has, in fact, been reduced to one
tenth of the elevation of the center of gravity before the fall
of the iceberg into the sea. Campbell has pointed out that,
                    CAMPBELL'S MECHANISM                           375

as a result, the centrifugal          momentum   not compensated by
gravity has now been reduced to one one hundredth of the
quantity of the effect of the ice mass when it was totally
uncompensated.
  It appears, therefore,        that the question as to whether a
mass    is   in isostatic adjustment or not   is the essence of the

matter.      The   icecap, if totally   uncompensated,   may produce
a centrifugal effect one hundred times the Eotvos effect for
the same mass; furthermore, it may be calculated by the
formula used by Campbell, with the reservation that a small
poleward component of gravity caused by the oblateness of
the earth and proportional to the degree of the oblateness
must be taken into consideration.
  Let us attempt to define and clarify this poleward compo-
nent of the force of gravity, and to estimate its probable rela-
tive magnitude. It applies both to masses in equilibrium but
with elevated centers of gravity, and to any mass resting on
the earth's surface but uncompensated. Its effect will be
greater in the latter case than in the former. In both cases it
will tend to counteract the equatorward component of the

centrifugal effect of the icecap.
  The poleward component of the force of gravity results
from the oblateness of the earth. It may be visualized as fol-
lows:   you should place a marble at the equator, and if the
        if

rotation of the earth should be interrupted so that the earth
would be       at rest,   then the marble would tend to   roll   toward
one of the poles, because the poles are closer to the center of
the earth, and therefore downhill. As I have mentioned, this
applies both to masses out of isostatic equilibrium, and to
those in equilibrium, but with elevated centers of gravity

(that is, to masses standing higher because of their lesser aver-
age density). However, as    have pointed out, there will be a
                                  I

quantitative difference between the poleward effects of gravity
in these two cases of about 100:1.
   In both cases these effects would tend to counterbalance
the equatorward component of the total centrifugal effect of
the icecap. The question is: What proportion of the equator-
376                   EARTH'S SHIFTING CRUST
ward      effect   would be thus counterbalanced? This              is   the crux
of the matter.
     The answer       to this    problem may be found in the following
consideration.        The   force with   which any object rolls down-
hill is   proportionate not only to its weight but to the gradient
of the slope.    On a flat surface the marble is at rest. It would
develop maximum momentum if it could fall straight down
toward the earth's center (if the surface were vertical). Be-
tween these extremes of zero and maximum momentum there
must be an even curve of increasing momentum with increas-
ing gradient. (It would follow, of course, that a sled would
develop twice the           momentum      if   going   down   a hill twice as

steep.)
     To   apply     this principle to the icecap,      we may observe        that
if   there were      no   oblateness to the earth, there         would be no
poleward component of gravity. If, on the other hand, the
oblateness were increased to the point where the icecap could
fall straight         would develop maximum momentum,
                    down,   it

the product of its velocity and of its weight. Between these
extremes, the poleward momentum would be proportional to
the gradient.         We    have seen, however, that             this    gradient
amounts       to only .017 per cent. It follows           from   this that the

poleward component of gravity acting on the icecap will be
.017 per cent of the tangential           component       of the centrifugal
effect of the icecap.        This of course      is   a relatively negligible
quantity.
  It may be objected that in this discussion we have offered

no mathematical calculations in support of the positions taken,
and that therefore we have no quantitative basis for our the-
ory.   This   is,   however, a misunderstanding.          It is essential, be-
fore mathematical computations are made, to understand the

assumptions on which they are based. In our correspondence
we have more than once              received communications in which
the authors have indirectly or directly stated that the question
as to whether a given mass was or was not isostatically com-

pensated was irrelevant. It has seemed to us, on the other hand,
that the actual balanced surface or shape of the earth as de-
                         CAMPBELL'S MECHANISM                                      377

termined by the balance of gravity and the centrifugal                        effect
of the rotation that is, the geoid, or the equipotential surfaces
  while perfectly valid as an assumption for many calcula-
tions, was irrelevant for our problem.                     We
                                                 feel it must be
conceded that             if   the conformity of the earth's materials in
general to the balance of the two forces of gravity and rotation,
so as to create the oblate shape of the earth the geoid is im-

portant, the failure of some of the materials to conform to
this   shape      is   also important.    By     definition, a    mass that   is   not
isostatically          compensated    fails to   conform to this shape. Thus
the real surface of mass differs                 from the geoid, and cannot
be called an equipotential surface. We feel that the real "sur-
face of mass" of the earth cannot be disregarded.
   In this situation equations are of no use. They will not help
us attain clarity. What is needed instead is a re-examination
of the assumptions on which equations have been made. This
is an intellectual problem of the logical development of ideas,

and corresponds to the process advocated by Maxwell as supe-
rior, in some situations, to calculations. Discussing the intri-
cacies of the           mechanics of rotation before the Royal Society,
Maxwell remarked:
       ...   If   any further progress     is    to   be made in simplifying and
  arranging the theory, it must be by the method that Poinsot has re-
  peatedly pointed out as the only one that can lead to a true knowl-
  edge of the subject that of proceeding from one distinct idea to an-
  other, instead of trusting to symbols           and equations    (296:24811).

  Let us remember that the author of                       this   remark was one
of the greatest mathematical physicists of all time. As such,
he understood the limitations of mathematics, of which the
most    essential         is that all calculations must be based in the

last analysis          on assumptions that consist of clear ideas, logically
expressible in words.
   I             to have it seem, however, that I am conced-
       do not wish
ing the point  that  Mr. Campbell and I have not provided
quantitative solutions. On the contrary, I believe that, on the
                                       Mr. Campbell has
basis of the assumptions discussed above,

provided sound and adequate (though approximate) quanti-
378            EARTH'S SHIFTING CRUST
tative estimates for the   equatorward component of the cen-
trifugal effect of the icecap,  and furthermore, that he has
indicated the correct order of magnitude of the bursting
stresses that may be produced in the crust.
XII    :   CONCLUSION

i.   Looking Forward

It is said that   a sound scientific hypothesis should have the
character of predictability. "Predictability" is said to apply
to a hypothesis if the hypothesis predicts the discovery of new
facts that later are actually discovered. An example of pre-

dictability of this sort was the discovery some years ago of
Pluto as the result of calculations based on the theory
of gravitation.   Our   theory has repeatedly   shown        that   it   pos-
sesses this sort of predictability.   On   one occasion Campbell
worked       from purely theoretical considerations, the pat-
           out,
terns of crustal fractures thatwould be formed by a dis-
placement. At the same time, in a different city and entirely
independently of him, I was discovering, in the works of W.
H. Hobbs, geological evidence showing that fracture pat-
terns of precisely this kind actually existed in the rocks.

Only later did we compare results. If I had started with his
drawings and used them to guide my research in the field,
I would have found approximately the fracture patterns that

he predicted, and I would have found them sooner. On
another occasion when, in 1951, radiocarbon dates showed
the very recent end of the North American ice sheet, I
reached the conclusion from the theory that the begin-
ning of that glaciation must have been quite recent, and
much more   recent than generally believed. At that time
thisconclusion could not be tested, because the range o
the radiocarbon method was not great enough. However,
I    was aware of the     fact that several scientists       were work-
ing on the problem of extending the range, and           I   confidently
looked forward to a confirmation of the theory when and if
the range was extended. I had to wait only until 1954, when
Horberg,     as already   mentioned, published results showing
380                    EARTH'S SHIFTING CRUST
that the icecap  had entered Ohio only 25,000 years ago.
Again and again we have had experiences similar to this.
Campbell has, in fact, suggested that the theory may have
economic importance because of the fact that it may give
us a tool through which we may attain more reliable infor-
mation about the hidden structures of the earth's crust, and
thus be able to locate valuable minerals. It seems to                         me
quite possible that his hope will eventually be realized.
     Our   theory appears to have another kind of predictability.
It is possible that it   can tell us something about the rela-
tivelynear future of the earth. The evidence appears to sug-
gest that displacements have occurred at short intervals.
Since what has happened in the past may be expected to hap-
pen in the future, it is quite reasonable to ask when another
movement may be               expected. There are a number of factors
that bear    on      this,   and they are worth discussing even though,
when we     get through,         we may    carry   away the    feeling that our
speculations may contain more imagination than substance.
  It would appear from the evidence I have presented that

the intervals between the beginnings of the last three dis-
placements were about 40,000 years in length. It seems, also,
that the last movement began between 26,000 and 17,000

years ago. If these assumptions are correct,             and      the average
                                                                 if

of these movements holds for the future,                  it   seems that the
next displacement of the crust should not be expected for
another 10,000 or 15,000 years. While this is a reassuring
thought, it should be kept in mind, however, that there are
a number of unknown factors in the situation, and that there
is   no reason
            to believe that the average of the last three dis-

placements tells us anything about the limits of variation in
the periods between displacements. On the contrary, the
conclusion to be reached from the investigation completed in
this     book   is    that the periods between displacements                 may
vary considerably.
     A
     number of factors favor a               movement somewhat sooner
than the time indicated by the average of the                    last   three dis-
placements.          Among      these, I   may mention the        fact,   empha-
                         CONCLUSION                            381

sized  by Brown, that the present Antarctic icecap is larger
than the last North American icecap. If Campbell's calcula-
tions are close to the truth, it seems that the bursting stresses
in the crust may now be close to the critical point, from this
source alone. Yet there is also a possibility that the centrifu-
gal effect of the Antarctic icecap may at the present time be
supplemented by another significant centrifugal effect cre-
ated by the icecap in Greenland. It is true that the Greenland
cap is much smaller than the one in Antarctica, but, on the
other hand, its center is much farther from the pole. For
this reason it could conceivably have an important centrifu-

gal effect. Its position on the meridian is such that any un-
compensated mass would add to rather than counteract the
effect of the Antarctic cap; the two icecaps are, so to speak,
in tandem.
   In recent years a French polar expedition has taken many
gravity readings across the top of the Greenland icecap. The
purpose of these readings was to assemble data for a deter-
mination of the state of isostatic adjustment of the Greenland
cap. The results of this piece of research are instructive for
the whole subject of isostasy. They can be read two ways.        On
the one hand, the gravity data when reduced according to
one of the formulas in common use the Faye-Bouguer                   -




showed an enormous excess of mass in Greenland (441:60-
61); on the other hand, the same data, when reinterpreted
differently, resulted in a finding of good isostatic adjust-
ment. It is important to realize that the different methods
of reducing gravity data are based on varying assumptions

regarding the deeper structure of the earth's crust, and that
these assumptions are not subject to direct confirmation.

Daly at one time remarked that he did not believe that any
of the different   methods of evaluating gravity data came very
near the actual truth.    It is   reasonable to think that the   se-
lection of assumptions in this field may be influenced by a gen-
eral belief in the soundness of isostasy, and that this general
belief will lead to a preference for those assumptions that
result in findings of close isostatic adjustment. It   is
                                                            perhaps
382                    EARTHS SHIFTING CRUST
on account of          this that Einstein   regarded the theory of   isos-

             unreasonable (128). According to our theory,
tasy as itself
Greenland possibly was deglaciated during the period of the
Wisconsin icecap in North America, and therefore the ice-
cap there may be recent, and isostatic adjustment poor,
   There are a few indications that the pressure of the Ant-
arctic cap (possibly reinforced by the Greenland cap) has

already begun to disturb the stability of the earth's crust.
These consist of recent seismic movements.
   In the study of earthquakes, specialists have distinguished
between them not only according to their scale but also by
a qualitative difference that appears to exist between those of
minor and those of major magnitudes. Minor earthquakes,
which occur daily in considerable numbers, are considered
to be of local origin.     are merely episodes in the per-
                               They
petual process of adjustment of strains in the earth's crust
arising        from   local causes.
     Some       of the major earthquakes,      on the other hand, are
considered to be qualitatively different. Benioff, for example,
suggests that these major earthquakes are not related to local
causes of any sort, but result from the operation of what he
calls "world-wide stress systems" (29) in other words, from

pressures applied to the earth's crust as a whole. So far as I
know, no geologist has advanced an explanation for these
world- wide pressures; it seems quite possible that they may
be related to the icecap pressure that, according to our view,
has been increasingly exerted on the crust for thousands of
years.
   Benioff draws attention to a fact that appears to confirm
this supposition. He points out that in recent decades there
has been an increasing tempo of major earthquakes; they
appear to be coming closer together and increasing in vio-
lence.         He   cites especially the great    quakes of 1904, 1924,
1
    935>   1
               94> an d 1950   (29:335). If the  Antarctic icecap is the
major cause of these quakes, we             can understand the increase
in their frequency and intensity, which may result either
from the increase of the quantity of Antarctic ice or from
                              CONCLUSION                                383

the progressive weakening of the crust under the repeated
major shocks.
  Some further confirmation of this suggestion may be found
in some specific features of the two greatest of the major

earthquakes, those of eastern India in 1897 and in 1950. The
earlier of these was a cataclysm that involved hundreds of
thousands of square miles. The later one was still more vio-
lent, in line with the observation made by Benioff. The
reader   may   note,   by glancing       at the globe, that the area in
which these two quakes occurred            lies   almost on the meridian
of 96 E. Long., which, it appears, is the meridian of direct
thrust of the Antarctic icecap. According to our theory, this
is the meridian along which the gradually increasing thrust

of the Antarctic icecap has been exerted for thousands of
years. Let us note the fact that Assam lies across the equator
from the South Pole, and that the thrust of the icecap would
tend to push the area toward the north, or poleward, so that,
because of the shape of the earth, the result would be com-
pression of the crust in that area. Now it is not unreasonable
to suppose that during several millennia the pressure from
Antarctica   may have       resulted in    some    elastic yielding of the
crust along the meridian, with consequent concentration of

compressive stresses in that area.
  I   cannot say that the constant pressure of the Antarctic
icecap, operating      on the   crust in the      same direction for ten
thousand years or more, and amounting to several times
a million times a million tons, definitely did cause some
yielding of the crust in that direction, because I do not know,
but I know what would have happened if there were some
yielding. Yielding, at the latitude of Assam, to a pressure
directed from the south would mean compression of the
crustal materialbetween lateral pressures, because of the
lessercircumference of the globe as one goes north. If we
suppose only a very slight yielding of the crust along the
meridian (amounting to only a few feet) the pressures so
produced would be very          great.   An   explosive situation     would
exist because rock     is   not very compressible.     The   forces   would
384               EARTH'S SHIFTING CRUST
have to express themselves somehow. There would be no
place to go but up. A striking confirmation of this may be
found in the extraordinary fact that Mt. Everest and pos-
sibly much of the Himalayan range appear to have been
raised    from 100   to 200 feet          by the gigantic earthquake of

     Now we learn from Daly that gravitationally the Hima-
layas are already too high. They are, or were before the
earthquake, over 700 feet higher than they should have
been for good isostatic adjustment. Earthquakes are generally
supposed to perform the function of enabling the crust to
adjust to the force of gravity. If an area stands too high,
earthquakes occur during a process of settling down to
equilibrium. If an area is too low, earthquakes may occur as
it is rising.   But what   shall    we     say about   an earthquake that
findsan area already too high, and shoves                  it   up   further?
This earthquake is not behaving according                 to the rules. It
is   not tending to establish the stability of the crust, but rather
is   exposing the crust to a situation of increased strain after
the quake.
     But most important of    where could the compressive,
                                   all,

horizontally directed force have come from to cause this
earthquake? The best reason for putting forth the claims of
the Antarctic icecap is that, so far, no one has produced a
more reasonable  suggestion. It is interesting that the editors
of Life, in their illustrated account of the great quake in
Assam, called it "the most mysterious earthquake of mod-
ern times/'
   There are a few additional items that appear to fit into
this picture. In the very year in which the Assam earthquake
occurred (1950) another great earthquake on the same merid-
ian, but on the opposite side of the earth, virtually destroyed
the city of Cuzco. Also near the same meridian, in Mexico,
we have   recently seen the rapid creation of the great new
volcanic mountain of Paricutfn, an event that Campbell
ascribes to the effects of the increasing bursting stress on the
crust in the earth's equatorial bulge. Finally,           it
                                                               may be worth
                             CONCLUSION                        385

while to mention Ewing's recent discovery of a world-wide
system of great submarine canyons, along which the crust is
technically active. Observers have suggested that these can-
yons are      widening. Breen has pointed out that their pat-
             still

tern (not yet fully established) is consistent with the effects
of a force attempting to pull the Western Hemisphere south-
ward    (44).
  I   am aware that the items that I have mentioned above
may      be
       all  explained someday according to other principles,
and may in fact have nothing to do with centrifugal effects
from Antarctica. However, I feel that a definite chance exists
that the phenomena may be related, and that they may indi-
cate that beginning of a crust displacement is not remote. The

question therefore arises as to whether, in case of another
displacement, it is possible to predict anything about it in
detail.   Among      the questions to which answers   may be sought
are those of the precise direction the displacement       may take,
and the total distance it may cover.
  As to the first question, our theory offers us the basis for
a reasonable estimate. If our finding of the location of the
center of mass of the Antarctic icecap is correct, and if we
assume that no other centrifugal effects from anomalies in
the crust will be acting to deflect the motion, we may expect
the next displacement to be in the direction of 96 E. Long,
from the South Pole. This would involve another southward
displacement of the Western Hemisphere, together with an-
other northward displacement of East Asia.
  A  guess as to the magnitude of the next displacement re-
quires the correct assessment of a number of rather impon-
derable factors.      We    should expect the crust to continue to
move until the Antarctic icecap was largely destroyed. This

might take longer than it did in the case of the North Amer-
ican icecap, because the Antarctic icecap is larger. On the
other hand, it could take less long, because in the case of
Antarctica there       no land available for the rearward build-
                       is

up    of the icecap as  it moves into the lower latitudes, such as

seems to      have occurred in North America. Perhaps we shall
386                   EARTH'S SHIFTING CRUST
have to be      satisfied, for    the present, with the guess that the
next displacement         may    be of roughly the same magnitude as
the last one.
     If these guesses    turn out to be correct, the next North Pole
will be in the vicinity of Lake Baikal, in Siberia. North
America, moving southward into the tropics, will subside
some hundreds of feet relatively to sea level, and the ocean
will      occupy the river valleys and will divide the continent
into several land areas. India will   move northward out of the
tropics,     and   since there will be    no land     to the south to pro-
vide a refuge for the fauna and flora, we shall have to expect
the extinction of many species of animals and plants now
confined to that country.          Many   other consequences      may be
unpredictable.        The
                    gradual climatic changes due to changing
latitude will beaccompanied by numerous sudden, violent,
and destructive climatic changes due to volcanism.



2.    A   General Summary

In      book I have presented a highly detailed mass of mate-
      this

rial, and I have sought to relate it to a single, essentially

simple hypothesis. It now remains to summarize the evi-
dence, and the argument for the hypothesis.
     We  have seen that the problem of the geographical stabil-
ity   of the poles has long been a vexatious matter for science.
From time       to                      have been advanced,
                     time theories of polar   shift

supported by large quantities of evidence, but the proposed
mechanisms have been found defective, and in consequence
the theories have been rejected.          The    failure of the theories
has led, in the following years, to neglect of the evidence, or
to its analysis in accordance with theories conforming to the
doctrine of the permanence of the poles. Although all the
older theories of polar change, including that of Wegener,
have been discredited, the evidence in favor of polar change
has constantly increased. As a consequence, many writers at the
                             CONCLUSION                                  387

present time are discussing polar     but none of them has
                                         shift,
as yet suggested an acceptable mechanism.
     Thegeneral evidence for displacements of the crust is ex-
ceedingly rich. In turn, the assumption of such displacements
serves to solve a wide range of problems, such as the causes
of ice ages, warm polar climates, mountain building; it pro-
vides a mechanism that may account for changes in the eleva-
tions of land areas    and   in the topography of the ocean floors;
it also provides a basis for the resolution of conflicts in iso-
static theory. For the period of the late Pleistocene, the theory

permits the construction of a chronology of polar             shifts,   with
three successive tentative polar positions in Alaska, Green-
land, and Hudson Bay preceding the present position of the
pole. The evidence for the location of the Hudson Bay
region at the pole during the         last   North American     ice age is

overwhelming, and        this fact in itself provides the principal

support for the      assumption of the earlier      shifts.   The tempo
of change indicated for the late Pleistocene            is    reflected in
evidence from earlier geological periods.
  The theory is able to explain not only the general succes-
sion of climatic changes in various parts of the world in the
late Pleistocene; it    can account also for the detailed history
of the last    North American  icecap. It can explain the fluctua-
tions of that icecap,     its    repeated retreats and readvances. It
shows that the      effects of    volcanism were directly responsible
for the oscillations. It shows also that these    same effects,
added                                            were responsi-
           to the effects of gradual climatic change,
ble for the widespread extinctions of species at the end of the
Pleistocene, and from this we may assume that the same
cause was responsible for numerous extinctions in earlier
geological periods. By providing a reasonable basis for the
assumptions of rapid climatic change and rapid topograph-
icalchange (including the existence of former continents and
land bridges), the theory provides solutions for many prob-
lems in the evolution and distribution of species.
     Ourtheory of displacement depends upon two assump-
tions, and on two only. One of these is that a continental ice-
                 EARTH'S SHIFTING CRUST

cap    largely or entirely
      is                      uncompensated isostatically. The
other assumption is that at   some point below the crust a weak
layer exists that will permit the displacement of the crust
over it. The first assumption is capable of verification, and
may even be verified    in the course of the current Geophysical
Year. This will depend, however, on whether the new gravity
data that are to be collected during this year are reduced by
formulas based on correct assumptions. There is no present
prospect of direct verification of the second assumption.
However, the body of geological evidence presented in this
book provides very strong indirect support for both these
assumptions.
  As to the mechanics of crust displacements, Campbell has
provided the necessary constructions. To some, the simplicity
of his thought may be unnerving, but I feel assured that in
the end this simplicity itself will be the justification for re-
posing wide confidence in this theory. For it appears that no
recondite principle can vitiate it. Who can argue with for-
mulas so simple that a high school student can, and usually
does, master    them?
   In addition to the support provided by evidence from the
field, our theory receives support from logic. It has been

recognized that one characteristic of sound new theories is
the simplicity of their basic assumptions, and another is their
capacity to explain a greater number of facts or a greater
range of problems than previous theories. It was the sim-
                             aroused the interest of Einstein,
plicity of this theory that first
in whose philosophy of science simplicity was a prime con-
sideration. It appeared to him also that it might explain a
far greater number of facts than were explainable by the
various theories that have been produced to explain the lead-
ing problems of the earth separately.
  I shall   have to admit that the   full   development of the im-
plications of crust displacements, for all the affected fields,
has carried me much further than I originally expected.
When I resurvey the structure that has now been erected on
the basis of the simple basic theory, I feel exactly as Sir
                                                            James
                                CONCLUSION                                         389

Frazer, author of the         Golden Bough, felt at the end of his
protracted labors, and I        cannot do better than conclude this
volume with his words:
   Now                      which necessarily presented itself to me at
             that the theory,
 first                      worked out in detail, I cannot but feel that
         in outline, has been
 in some places I may have pushed it too far. If this should prove to
 have been the case, I will readily acknowledge and retract my error
 as soon as it is brought home to me. Meanwhile, my essay may serve
 its purpose as a first
                        attempt to solve a difficult problem, and to bring
 a variety of scattered facts into some sort of order and system. (The
  Magic Art)




                              "But when you have the      truth, everything        fits.

                          I   think that's the   main   test of truth. It     fits,    it

                          makes a harmony, one pattern       all   through.    .   .   ."


                                      E. R.   Punshon, Information Received
                                                        (Penguin Books, 1955)
APPENDIX

Letters         from Albert Einstein and George Sarton

                                        A. Einstein
                                    112 Mercer Street
                                     Princeton, N. J.

                                                                     November      24, 1952

Mr. Charles Hapgood
2 Allerton Street
Provincetown, Mass.

Dear     Sir:


  I have read already some years ago in a popular article about the

idea that excentric masses of ice, accumulated near a pole, could pro-
duce from time to time considerable dislocations of the floating rigid
crust of the earth. I       have never occupied myself with           this   problem but
my      impression   is   that a careful study of this hypothesis            is
                                                                                  really de-
sirable.
   I think that our factual knowledge of the underlying facts is at pres-

ent not precise enough for a reliable answer based exclusively on
calculations. Knowledge of geological and paleontological facts may be
of decisive importance in the matter. In any case,              it   would not be     justi-
fied to discard the idea a priori as adventurous.
  The question whether high pressure may not be able to produce
fusion of nuclei is also quite justified. It is not known to me if a quanti-
tative theory has been worked out by astrophysicists. The action of

pressure    would not be a         static effect as classical   mechanics would sug-
gest,    but a kinetic  corresponding not to temperature but to de-
                          effect

generacy of gases of high density. You should correspond about this
with an astrophysicist experienced in quantum theory, f.i. Dr. M.
Schwarzschild at the Princeton University Observatory.
                                                         Sincerely yours,
                                                         (Signed) A. Einstein
                                   APPENDIX
                                                                          Princeton,
                                                                          May       8,   1953
Dear Mr. Hapgood,

  I thank you very much for the manuscript that you sent me on May
3rd. I find your arguments very impressive and have the impression that
your hypothesis is correct. One can hardly doubt that significant shifts
of the crust of the earth have taken place repeatedly and within a short
time. The empirical material you have compiled would hardly permit
another interpretation.
  It   is   certainly true, too, that ice   is   continually deposited in the polar
regions.  These deposits must lead to instability of the crust when it is
sufficiently strong not to constantly keep in balance by the adjustment
of the polar regions.
   The thickness of the icecap at the polar regions must, if this is the
case, constantly increase, at least where a foundation of rock is present.
One should be able to estimate empirically the annual increase of the
polar icecaps. If there exists at least in one part of the polar regions a
rock foundation for the icecap, one should be able to calculate how
much   tune was needed to deposit the whole of the icecap. The amount
of the ice that flowed off should be negligible in this calculation. In this

way one could almost prove your     hypothesis.
  Another    striking circumstance appears in connection with the ellip-
ticity of the meridians. If according to your hypothesis an approximate

folding of the meridional volume takes place, that is, folding of a
meridional volume within an equatorial volume (which is considerably
larger), this event will have to be accompanied by a fracture of the hard
crust of the earth. This also  fits in
                                       very well with the existing phe-
nomena   of the volcanic coastal regions with their mainly north-south
extension and the narrowness in the east-west direction. Without your
hypothesis one could hardly find a halfway reasonable explanation for
these weak spots of the present-day crust of the earth.
  Excuse       me   for not writing in English.       My   secretary has      been away
for   some    and "spelling" makes frightful
              time,                                        difficulties for   me.
  With sincere respect and kind regards,
                                                         Yours,
                                                         (Signed)     A. Einstein
(Translated by Use Politzer)
392              EARTH'S SHIFTING CRUST
                                                        5   Channing   Place,

                                                        Cambridge, Mass.,
                                                        Tuesday   '55 06.07
Dear Mr. Hapgood,

  I have read your lecture at the AMNH, the discussion which followed
and the Einstein documents, with deep interest. I really think that you
are on the right track but have no authority to express a more definite

opinion. It is clear that the only opinions which matter are those which
are the results of independent studies by competent specialists.
  The combination of ideas is so new that the history of science has
nothing to contribute to its understanding. The fact that there have
been earlier theories like those of Wegener, Kreichgauer and Vening
Meinesz simply proves that some meteorologic and geologic problems
had to be solved, and exercised the minds of men of science. What you
need is not historical facts, but physical ones, and mathematical de-
velopments.
                                             With   every good wish
                                             (Signed)
                                             George Sarton
GLOSSARY
ANOMALY,     Positive: An excess of mass at a point on the crust, as com-

    pared with the average distribution of mass.
      Negative: A similar but opposite condition, in which there is a
    local deficiency of mass.
ANTICLINE: An     archlike folding of rocks or rock strata so that the
   lower beds or strata are enclosed in the upper.
ARCHAEOCYATHIDAE: A fossil sponge, at one time supposed to be
    a   fossil coral.

ASTHENOSPHERE: A                layer of material   below the   crust;   assumed to
    be weak because of heat and pressure.
BASEMENT ROCKS:               Rocks of great obscurity and complexity lying
    beneath the upper rock           layers; thus, the    lowermost rocks of the
    known     series.

CENTRIFUGAL FORCE: The                  force tending to throw a         body away
    from the     center, in a straight-line direction of flight.
DECIDUOUS TREES:              Trees having seasonally falling foliage (oak,
    elm,   etc.) as   contrasted with evergreens, having constantly renewed
    foliage (pine, etc.).
DIASTROPHISM: The              process, or processes, by which major features
    of the crust are      formed through deformation, such as faults, plateaus,
    etc.

ECOLOGICAL:             Pertaining to the mutual relationship between organ-
    isms   and   their environment.     An ecology is the place-relationship of
    life   forms in their environment.
EPEIROGENESIS (EPEIROGENY): A          grander form of diastrophism,
    forming the broader features of crustal relief, such as continents,
    ocean beds,       etc.

EPICONTINENTAL:           Pertaining to regions along the continental shelf.
EUSTATIC:        Pertaining to a land area which has not undergone eleva-
    tion or depression.
GEOID: The    figure of the earth (an oblate sphere) with the average sea
    level conceived of as extending throughout the continents.
GEOSYNCLINE: A great downward flexing of the crust.
GRAVITY, Center of: An imaginary point at which,                      for reasons of

    computation, the entire weight or mass of a body             is   imagined to be
    concentrated.
HORSE LATITUDES: A belt in the neighborhood of 30                       N. or   S.   Lat,
    characterized by high pressure, calms,          and   baffling winds.
394                       EARTH'S SHIFTING CRUST
HYDROSTATIC: Pertaining to pressure and equilibrium of                             liquids.
IGNEOUS ROCKS: Rocks which have cooled and solidified                              from a
      molten     state.
INSOLATION:        Solar radiation received by the earth. The insolation
      curve represents the combined effects on mean world-wide tempera-
      tures of various astronomical factors, such as precession and varia-
      tions of the orbit of the earth about the sun.
ISOSTASY: The             definition   is   discussed in the text: Chapter VI.
LITHOSPHERE: The            outer shell of the planet. It is composed of rocks
      and the products derived from them by erosion, etc., such as gravels,
      soils, and the like. The crystalline, solid lithosphere is assumed to be
      between 20 and 40 miles               thick. (Also called crust.)
LOAD,    Negative: A deficiency of matter at a given point on the crust;
      considered negative because it results in a pressure from within, as
      a result of the tendency to achieve hydrostatic balance.
        Positive:    A
                     local excess of mass.
MAGMA:     Molten rock material within the earth. When cooled and
   crystallized into solid form it yields the so-called igneous rocks (q.v.).
MASS: A measure of the amount of matter in a body.
MASS, Center of: Point at which the mass is assumed to be concen-
      trated; for computational purposes.
METAMORPHIC:          Altered; applied to rocks or rock strata that                  have
      been physically changed by heat or other means.
MILLIGAL: A           thickness of ten meters of granite; the effects
                                                                      (gravi-
         produced by such mass.
      tational)
MUTATION: A sudden variation in the                      characteristics of a life   form
      as   compared       to those of its progenitors.
NEBULAR THEORY: A          theory of the origin of the solar system, ac-
      cording to which a gaseous nebula coalesced and cooled to form
      compacted centers which then further contracted to form the
      planets.
OOZE: A       soft deep-sea deposit
                                               composed of     shells,    debris, meteoric
      dust, etc. Argillaceous ooze is a clayey type.
PLANETESIMAL: A          small, solid           planetary body having an individual
      orbit about the sun.
PLANETESIMAL HYPOTHESIS: A            theory of the origin of the solar
      system supposing that the planets were formed by collision and
      coalescence of planetesimals and thus have never been
                                                                wholly
      molten.
PLICATION: Folding into layers or strata.
PRECESSION: The wobbling of the axis of the                     earth,    making the pole
      describe a circle as the planet spins.
RADIATION,          Adaptive:     The       production of a diversified fauna as the
      result of the availability of           new ecological spaces. New faunas re-
                             GLOSSARY                                    395
    suitfrom the adaptation of an original stock to the new environ-
    mental opportunities for living space.
SIAL: Silicon-aluminum rocks.
SIMA: Silicon-magnesium    rocks.
STRANDLINE: A line marking a fossil seashore.
STRATIGRAPHIC: Pertaining to the arrangement             of rock strata.
TECTONIC: Pertaining to rock structures resulting        from deformation
    of the crust.
TURBIDITY CURRENTS:            Submarine currents caused by slumping
    of deposits along continental margins.  These currents carry sedi-
    ments with them.
UNCOMPENSATED WEIGHT: The weight of a crustal formation not
    isostatically adjusted. It thus constitutes   a positive anomaly   (q.v.).
UNIAXIAL: The   condition of having only one axis, as a sphere.
VARVES: Annual  deposits of sediment. These can be counted to de-
   termine annual shorelines of old lakes.
VIRENZPERIOD: A period in the history of a life form in which it ex-
    periences an explosive evolution and proliferation.
VISCOSITY: The     quality of being able to yield to stress or of being
    able to flow; the measure of such a property.
BIBLIOGRAPHY
The   following alphabetical    list   serves   both   as bibliography   and   as iden-
tification for specific sources cited in the text. (See footnote, p.               10.)


 1.   Almond, M., Clegg, J. A., and Jaeger, J. C., "Rock Magnetism."
      Philosophical Magazine, Ser. 8, v. i, pp. 77 iff ( I 9bfy-
2.    Anderson, E. C., Levi, H., and Tauber, H., "Copenhagen Natural
      Radiocarbon Measurements I." Science, 118:9 (1953).
3.    Anderson, R. J., "The Anatomy of the Indian Elephant/' Journal
      of   Anatomy and   Physiology, 27:491-94 (1883).
4.    Anderson, W., "Quaternary Sea-Levels in the Northern Hemi-
      sphere/' Geological Magazine, 76:489-93 (Nov., 1939).
5.    Antevs, Ernst, "The Climatological Significance of Annual Rings
                          1
      in Fossil Woods/ American Journal of Science, (5) 9:296-302

      0925)'
 6.   Antevs, Ernst, The Last Glaciation with Special Reference to the
      Ice Retreat in Northeastern North America. New York, The Amer-
      ican Geographical Society, 1928.
 7.   Antevs, Ernst,   "Modes    of Retreat of the Pleistocene Ice Sheets/'
      Journal of Geology, 47:503-08        (July, 1939).
 8.   Antevs, Ernst, "Geochronology of the Deglacial and Neothermal
      Ages." Journal of Geology, 61:195-230 (May, 1953).
 9.   Antevs, Ernst, "Geochronology of the Deglacial and Neothermal
      Ages. A Reply." Journal of Geology, v. 62, No. 5 (Sept., 1954).
10.   Antevs, Ernest, "Varve and Radiocarbon Chronologies Appraised
      by Pollen Data." Journal of Geology, v. 63, No. 5 (Sept., 1955).
11.  Anthony, Harold, "Nature's Deep Freeze." Science Digest (Jan.,
     1950). (Condensed from Natural History, Sept., 1949.)
12. Army Observer's Report of Operation
                                             Highjump, Task 'Force 68,
     United States Navy, 1947. (Unclassified.)
13. Arrhenius, Gustav. See Pettersson, Hans.

i3a. Arrhenius, Gustav, "Sediment Cores from the East Pacific/' Reporti
     of the Swedish Deep-Sea Expedition, v. 5, fasc. i (1952).
14.   Arrhenius, G., Kjellberg, G., and Libby, W. F., "Age Determination
      of Pacific Chalk Ooze by Radiocarbon and Titanium Content."
      Tellus, v. 3, No. 4 (Nov., 1951).
15.   Ashley, George H., General Information on Coal Mineral Resource
      Report No. 6, Part I, Geological Survey of Pennsylvania. 1928.
16.   Australian Association for the Advancement of Science, Reports,
      y. 10 (1904).
                                BIBLIOGRAPHY                                           397

17.   Bailey,Thomas L., "Late Pleistocene Coast Range Orogenesis in
      Southern California." Abstracts, Bulletin of the Geological Society,
      v. 52, Pt. 2 (2),
                      pp. 1888-89 (1941).
18.   Bain, George W., "Mapping the Climatic Zones of the Geologic
      Past." Yale Scientific Magazine, v. xxvii, No. 5 (Feb., 1953) (reprint).

19.   Bain, George W., personal communication.
20.   Ball, Sir Robert, The Cause of an Ice Age.               New   York, Appleton,
      1892.
21.   Bandy, O. L., "Paleotemperatures of Pacific Bottom Waters and
      Multiple Hypotheses." Science , v. 123, No. 3194 (March 16, 1956).
22.   Barley, Alfred, The Drayson Problem. Exeter, England, Pollard,
      1922.
23.   Barley, Alfred,The Ice Ages. Lewes, Sussex, England, Baxter, 1927.
24.   Barnes, Joseph, personal conference.
25.   Bell, Robert, "On the Occurrence of Mammoth and Mastodon Re-
      mains around Hudson Bay." Bulletin of the Geological Society of
      America, 9:369-90 (June          22, 1898).
26.   Benedict, Francis G., The Physiology of the Elephant. Washington,
      Carnegie Institution of Washington, 1936.
27.   Benedikt, Elliot T.,      "A Method          of Determination of the Direction
      of the Magnetic Field of the Earth in Geological Epochs."                      Amer-
      ican Journal of Science, v. 241, No. 2 (Feb., 1943).
28.   Benfield, A. E.,        "The   Earth's Heat." Scientific American, v. 183,
      No. 6  (Dec., 1950).
29.   Benioff, H., "Global Strain           Accumulation and Release          as   Revealed
      by Great Earthquakes." Bulletin of the Geological Society of Amer-
      ica, v. 62, No. 4 (April, 1951).

30.   Benioff, H., Interview by Associated Press,             Daytona Beach Evening
      News, March 6, 1952.
31.   Bergquist, N. O., The           Moon     Puzzle.  A   Revised Classical Theory
      Correlating       the
                        Origin         of    the    Moon    with Many Problems in
      Natural Science. Copenhagen, Denmark, Grafisk Forlag, 1954.
32.   Berry, Edward Wilbur, The Past Climate of the North Polar
      Region. Washington, The Smithsonian Institution, 1930.
33.   Birch, F., "Elasticity of Igneous Rocks at High Temperatures and

      Pressures." Bulletin of the Geological Society of America, 54:263-
      86 (1943).
34.   Birch,    F.,   and Bancroft,   D.,   "The     Elasticity of Glass at   High Tem-
      peratures and the Vitreous Basalt Substratum." American Journal
      of Science, 240:457-90 (1942).
35.   Birch, F.,      and Bancroft,   D., "New Measurements of the Rigidity
        of Rocks at     High   Pressure." Journal of Geology, 48:752-66 (1940).

36.   Black,     Davidson, "Paleogeography and Polar Shift." Reprinted
398                         EARTH'S SHIFTING CRUST
      from the Bulletin of the Geological Society of China,                   v.   X, Peiping,


37.   Blackett, P.          M.   S.,   Lectures on   Rock Magnetism. New York,          Inter-
      science Publications, 1956.

38.   Blanchard, Jacques, L'Hypothese du deplacement des poles et                           la

      chronologic du quaternaire. Paris, Editions Universitaires, 1942.
39.   Bliss,   W.     L.,   "Radiocarbon Contamination." American Antiquity,
      v. xvii,   No.    3 (Jan., 1952).
40.   Boas, Franz, ed., General Anthropology. Boston, Heath, 1938.
41.   Bradley, W. H., et al., Professional Papers 136A, B. United States
      Geological Survey, 1940.
42.   Bradley, W. H., The Varves and Climate of the Green River Epoch.
      Professional Paper 158. United States Geological Survey.
43.   Bramlette, G., and Bradley, W. H., Geology and Biology of North
      Atlantic Deep-Sea Cores. Professional Paper 196. United States
      Geological Survey.
      Brannon, H. R.,             et al.   See   "Humble   Oil Radiocarbon Dates I."
44.   Breen, Walter, personal communication.
45.   Brewster, E. T., This Puzzling Planet. New York, Bobbs, 1928.
46.   Brice, J. C., personal communication.

47.   Bridgman, P. W., "Effects of High Shearing Stress                      Combined with
      High Hydrostatic Pressure." Physical Review, 48:825-47 (1935).

48.   Bridgman, P. W., "Some Implications for Geophysics of High Pres-
      sure Phenomena." Bulletin of the Geological Society of America,


49.   Bridgman, P. W., Studies in Large                 Plastic   Flow and Fracture.     New
      York, McGraw-Hill, 1952.
50.   Bridgman, P. W., personal conference.
51.   Bridgman, P. W., personal communication.
52.   Brooks, C. E. P., Climate Through the Ages.                    New     York,   McGraw-
      Hill, 1949.

53.   Brouwer, Dirk, personal communication.
54.   Brown,  Hugh Auchincloss, Popular Awakening Concerning the
      Impending Flood. Lithographed manuscript copy of a proposed
      illustrated book, copyright 1948, with corrections and additions
      inserted by the author to 1951.                 Ann   Arbor, Michigan, Edwards,
      1948.
55.   Brown,     J.   MacMillan, The Riddle of the                Pacific.   London, Fisher
      Unwin,     1925.
56.   Bruckner, Eduard, "Die Schneegrenze in der Antarctis." Zeitschrift
      fur Gletscherkunde, 7:276-79 (1913).
57.   Bucher, Walter H., "The Crust of the Earth." Scientific American
      (May, 1950).
                                     BIBLIOGRAPHY                                          399

58.    Bucher, Walter H.,            The Deformation        of the Earth's Crust. Prince-
       ton, University Press, 1933.
59.    Bullard, E. C., Review of Jeffreys' s            The    Earth, %d ed. Science, v.
       119,    No. 3081    (Jan. 15, 1954).
60.                The Metaphysical Foundations of Modern Science, rev.
       Burtt, E. A.,
       ed. Garden City, Doubleday, 1954.
61.    Byrd, Admiral Richard E., "Exploring the Ice Age in Antarctica."
    National Geographic Magazine, v. LXVIII, No. 4 (Oct., 1935).
62. Byrd, Admiral Richard E., "Our Navy Explores Antarctica."
    National Geographic Magazine, v. XCII, No. 4 (Oct., 1947).
63. Cain, S. A., Foundations of Plant Geography. New York, Harper,
       1944.
64.    de Camp, L. Sprague, Lost Continents.                New   York,   Gnome,     1954.
65.    Campbell, James H., personal conference.
66.    Campbell, James H., personal communication.
67.    Campbell, J. H., and Hapgood, C. H., "Effect of Polar Ice                      on the
       Crust of the Earth." Yale Scientific Magazine,                     v.    XXXI, No.     i


       (Oct., 1956).
68.    Carsola, Alfred     "Bathymetry of the Arctic Ocean." Journal of
                               J.,

       Geology,       v. 63,   No.
                            3, pp. 274-78 (May, 1955).

69.    Caster, K. E., and Mendes, J. C., "Geological Comparison of South
       America with South Africa after Twenty Years." Abstract, Bulletin
       of the Geological Society of America, 58:1173 (1947).
70.    Challinor, J., "Remarkable Example of Superficial Folding                      Due    to
       Glacial Drag." Geological Magazine, 84:270-72 (Sept., 1947).

71.    Chamberlin, R. T., "Origin and History of the Earth." In Moulton,
       F. R., ed., The World and Man as Science Sees Them. Garden

       City,Doubleday, 1937.
72.    Chancy, Ralph W., "Tertiary Forests and Continental History."
       Bulletin of the Geological Society of America, v. 51, No. 3 (March
       i,   1940).
73.    Chaney, R. W., "The Ecological Composition of the Eagle Creek
       Flora." Bulletin of the Geological Society of America, v. 31, No. i

       (March        31, 1920).
74.    Chapin, Henry, and Smith, Walton, The Ocean River.                          New    York,
       Scribner's, 1952.

75.    Charlesworth,       J. K.,    "The   Ice   Age and   the Future of       Man." Science
       Progress (London), XLI:i6i (Jan., 1953).
76.    "Chicago Radiocarbon Dates." Science, v. 113, No. 2927 (Feb.                           2,



76a,   "Chicago Radiocarbon Dates                 II." Science, v. 114,        No. 2960   (Sept.
       21, 1951).

77.    "Chicago Radiocarbon Dates                 III." Science, v. 116,       No. 3025 (Dec.
       *9> 195*)-
4-oo                   EARTH'S SHIFTING CRUST
78.    ''Chicago Radiocarbon Dates IV." Science, v. 119, No. 3083 (Jan.
       *9> 1954)-

79.    "Chicago Radiocarbon Dates V." Science,             v. 120,   No. 3123 (Nov.       5,

       1954).
80.    Clegg, J. A.,   "Rock Magnetism," Nature, 178:1085 (Nov. 17, 1956).
81.    Clegg, J. A.,   Almond, Mary, and Stubbs, P. H. S., "Remanent Mag-
       netism of      Some Sedimentary Rocks in Britain." Philosophical
    Magazine, 45:365 (June, 1954).
82. Clegg, J. A., Deutsch, E. R., and              Griffiths,   D. H., "Magnetism of
       the Deccan Trap." Philosophical Magazine, Ser. 8,                  v.   i,   pp. 4193


83.    Clisby,   Katharyn H., personal communication.
84.    Clisby,   Katharyn H., and Sears, Paul B., "The San Augustin Plains-
       Pleistocene Climatic Changes." Science,           v. 124,   No.. 3221 (Sept. 21,


85.    Cloos, Hans, Conversation with the Earth.            New    York, Knopf, 1953.
86.    Colbert,     Edwin   H.,   "The   Pleistocene   Mammals       of   North America
       and Their Relations        to Eurasian    Forms." In Early Man, symposium
       edited by George G. MacCurdy, published for the                         Academy    of
       Natural Sciences, Philadelphia, Lippincott, 1937.
87.    Coleman, A. P., Ice Ages Recent and Ancient.                   New      York, Mac-
       millan, 1929.
87a.   Columbia Research News,            VII, No. 2 (Feb., 1957).
                                         v.

88.    Conant, James        B.,   On   Understanding Science. New York,                 New
       American Library, 1951.
89.    "Copenhagen Natural Radiocarbon Measurements II." Science, v.
       124, No. 3227 (Nov. 2, 1956).
90.    Crane, H. R., "Antiquity of the Sandia Culture. Carbon 14 Meas-
       urements." Science, v. 122, No. 3172 (Oct. 14, 1955).
91.    Croll, James, Climate and Time. London, Daldy, Isbister, 1875.
       Crust of the Earth, a Symposium on the. See Poldervaart, ed.
92.    Cushman, Joseph A., "Study of the Foraminifera Contained in
       Cores from the Bartlett Deep." American Journal of Science, v. 239,
       No. 2, pp. 128-47.
93.    Daly, R. A., The Changing World of the Ice Age. New Haven, Yale,
       1934-
94.    Daly, R. A., "Pleistocene Glaciation          and the Coral Reef Problem."
       American Journal of Science,           Ser. 4, v. 30, pp. 297-308.

95.    Daly, R. A., "Earth Crust Slides          on a Great Sea of        Glass." Science
       News  Letter (May 9, 1925).
96.    Daly, R. A., The Daly Volume of the American Journal of Science.
       American Journal of Science, v. 242A (1945).
97.    Daly, R. A., The Strength and Structure of the Earth, New York,
       Prentice Hall, 1940.
                                    BIBLIOGRAPHY                                          4O1

98.    Daly, R. A.,     Our Mobile      Earth.     New   York and London,        Scribner's,

       1926.
99.    Daly, R. A.,        "A Recent World Wide Sinking                 of   Ocean Level."
    Geological Magazine, 52:246-61 (1920).
100. Daly, R. A., personal conference.
101.    Dana's Manual of Mineralogy, i$th                ed., rev.   by Cornelius   S.   Hurl-
        but, Jr.   New
                    York, Wiley, 1952.
102.    Dana, James D., Corals and Coral Islands.               New    York, Dodd, Mead,
        1872.
103.    Darwin, Charles, The Origin of Species. (Reprinted from the 6th
        London      edition.)    New York,       Burt, n.d.
104.    Darwin, Charles, Journal of Research.                 New   York, American       Home
        Library, 1902.
105.    Darwin, George H., "On the Influence of Geological Changes on
        the Earth's Axis of Rotation." Philosophical Transactions of the

        Royal     Society, v. 167, Pt.      i.

106.    David, T.      W.   E.,    "Antarctica     and Some     of Its Problems." Geo-

     graphical Journal, 43:605-30 (1914).
107. Davies, O., "African Pluvials and European Glaciations." Nature,
        v. 178,    No. 4536 (Oct.
                                6, 1956).

io7a. Deevey, E. S., and Flint, R. F., "Postglacial Hypsithermal                            In-
      terval." Science, v. 125, No. 3240 (Feb. i, 1957).
108.    De     Geer,   Ebba Hult, "Geochronology      of the Deglacial and Neo-
        thermal Ages:        A    Discussion." Journal of Geology, v. 62, No. 5

        (Sept., 1954).
109.    De  Geer, Gerard Jakob, "On the Solar Curve as Dating the Ice
        Age, the New York Moraine and Niagara Falls through the Swed-
    ish Time Scale." Geografiska Annaler (1926).
no. De Geer, Gerard, "Compte rendu." Geological Congress,                           1910.
111.    Dennis, Clifford     "Experiments in Planetary Deformation of
                                  E.,
        the Earth." Pan-American Geologist, 55:241-58 (1931).
112.    Dietz, Robert S., Technical Report ONRL-j-tf, Office of Naval
        Research, London, Jan. 10, 1957. (An informal report of the con-
        ference on rock magnetism held in London in December, 1957.
        The          report, to appear in
                official                    Advances in Physics sometime
        during 1957,  not being at hand, I  have found it necessary to cite
        this informal report in one or two places, despite the official re-

        quest that it "not be considered a part of the scientific literature.")
113.    Digby, Bassett, The Mammoth and Mammoth-Hunting Grounds
        in Northeast Siberia. New York, Appleton, 1926.
114.    Dillon,    Lawrence  "Wisconsin Climate and Life Zones in North
                                  S.,

        America." Science, v. 123, No. 3188 (Feb. 2, 1956).
115.    Dodson, Edward O., A Textbook of Evolution. Philadelphia and
        London, Saunders,           1952.
4O2                     EARTH'S SHIFTING CRUST
116.   Dorf,    E.,    "Plants       and the Geologic Time          Scale."   See   Polder-
       vaart, ed.

117.   Drayson, A. W., The Last Glacial Period in Geology, 1873. Thirty
       Thousand Years of the Earth's Past History, 1888. Untrodden
       Ground in Astronomy and Geology, 1890.
118.   Dreimanis, Alexis, "Stratigraphy of the Wisconsin Glacial Stage
       along the Northwestern Shore of Lake Erie/' Science, v. 126, No.
       3265 (July 26, 1957).
119.   du Noiiy, Pierre Lecomte,                Human   Destiny.   New   York,   Longmans
       Green, 1947.
120.   Du Toit, A. L.,         A     Geological Comparison of South America with
       South Africa. Washington, Carnegie Institution of Washington,
       Publication No. 381, 1927.
121.   Du  Toit, A. L., "Further Remarks on Continental Drift." Amer-
       ican Journal of Science, 243:404-08 (1945).
122.   Dutton, Clarence, "On Some of the Greater Problems of Physical
       Geology." (Chapter XIII of Bulletin 78, Physics of the Earth, of
       the National Research Council, 1931.)
123.   Eardley, Armand J., "The Cause of                    Mountain Formation: an
       Enigma." The American Scientist, v. 45, No. 3 (June, 1957).
124.   Eddington, A. E., "The Borderland of Astronomy and Geology."
       Smithsonian Reports, 1923.
125.   Edmondson, Charles Howard, "Growth of Hawaiian                               Corals."
       Bernice P. Bishop             Museum      Bulletin 58, Honolulu, published by
       the   Museum,         1929.
126.   Einarsson, T.,         and     Sigurgeirsson, T.,    "Rock Magnetism          in Ice-
       land." Nature,         v. 175,   No. 892   (1955)*
127.   Einstein, Albert,           "On   the Generalized     Theory of Gravitation."
       Scientific     American,    No. 4 (April, 1950).
                                      v. 182,

128.   Einstein, Albert, personal communication.
129.   Einstein, Albert, conference.
130.   Ekman, Sven, Zoogeography                  of the Sea.   London, Sidgwick and
       Jackson, 1953.
131.   Emiliani, Cesare, "Temperatures of Pacific Bottom Waters and
       Polar Superficial Waters during the Tertiary." Science, v. 119, No.
       3103 (June          19, 1954).

132.   Emiliani, Cesare, "Pleistocene Temperatures." Journal of Geology,
       v. 63,   No.   6, pp. 538-78 (Nov., 1955).
133.   Emiliani,       Cesare, "On Paleotemperatures                of   Pacific    Bottom
       Waters." Science,         No. 3194 (March 16, 1956).
                                   v. 123,

134.   Emiliani, Cesare, "Note on the Absolute Chronology of                        Human
       Evolution." Science, v. 123, No. 3204 (May 25, 1956).
135.   Emiliani, Cesare, "Temperature and Age Analysis of Deep-Sea
       Cores." Science, v. 125, No. 3244 (March i, 1957).
                                     BIBLIOGRAPHY                                    4OJ

136.   Emiliani, Cesare, personal communication.
137.   Ericson, David B., "North Atlantic Deep-Sea Sediments and Sub-
       marine Canyons." Transactions of the New York Academy of Sci-
       ences, Ser. II, v. 15,        No.   2 (Dec., 1952).

138.   Ericson,          "Sediments of the North Atlantic." Lamont
                       David   B.,

     Geological Observatory Technical Report on Submarine Geology,
     No. i (Nov., 1953).
139. Ericson, D. B., Ewing, Maurice, and Heezen, B. C., "Deep-Sea
     Sands and Submarine Canyons." Bulletin of the Geological So-
       ciety of    America, 62:961-65 (1951).
140.   Ericson, D. B., Ewing, Maurice, and Heezen, B. C., "Turbidity
       Currents and Sediments in the North Atlantic." Bulletin of the
       American Association of Petroleum             Geologists, v. 36,   No.   3 (March,
       1952). (Reprint.)
141.   Ericson, D. B., Ewing, Maurice, Heezen, B. C.,            and Wollin, Goesta,
       "Sediment Deposition in the Deep Atlantic." Lamont Geological
       Observatory Contribution No. 130. Geological Society of America
       Special Paper 62 (1955).
142.   Ericson, D. B., and Wollin, Goesta, "Correlation of Six Cores from
       the Equatorial Atlantic             and the Caribbean." Deep-Sea Research,
       3:104-25 (1956).
143.   Ericson, D. B.,         and Wollin, Goesta, "Micropaleontological and
       Isotopic Determinations of Pleistocene Climates." Micropaleontol-
       ogy f   v. 2,   No.   3 (July, 1956).
       Ericson, D. B., et  al. t "Late Pleistocene Climates and
144.                                                            Deep-Sea
       Sediment." Science, v. 124, No. 3218 (Aug. 31, 1956).
145.   Ericson, D. B., personal communication.
146.   Ewing, Maurice, and Donn, W. L., "A Theory of Ice Ages."
                     No. 3207 (June 15, 1956).
       Science, v. 123,
147.   Ewing, Heezen, Ericson, Northrup, and Dorman, "Exploration of
       the Northwest Atlantic Mid-Ocean Canyon." Bulletin of the Geo-
       logical Society of America, 64:865-68 (July, 1953).
148.   Farrington, William, personal communication.
149.   Faul, Henry, ed., Nuclear Geology, a Symposium.                      New     York,
       Wiley, 1954.
150.   Fenner, C. N.,           "Pleistocene Climate         and Topography of the
       Arequipa Region, Peru." Bulletin of the Geological Society of
       America, v. 59, No. 9 (Sept., 1948).
151.   Fenton, C. L., "Paleontology and Mathematical Evolution." Pan-
       American Geologist, v. LV, No. 3, pp. 162-74 (April, 1931).
152.   Finnegan, H. E., personal communication.
153.   Fisk, H. N., and McFarlan, E., "Late Quaternary Deltaic Deposits
       of the Mississippi River." See Poldervaart.

154.   Fleming,  J. A., ed., Terrestrial Magnetism              and   Electricity. (Vol.
404                     EARTH'S SHIFTING CRUST
       VIII of "Physics of the Earth," published under the auspices of
       the National Research Council.) New York, Dover, 1949.
155.   Flint, R. F., Knopf, A., and Longwell, R., Outline of Physical

     Geology , 2d ed. New York, Wiley, 1941.
156. Flint, Richard Foster, Glacial Geology and the Pleistocene Epoch.
       New     York, Wiley, 1947.
157.   Flint,    Richard Foster, "Rates of Advance and Retreat of the
       Margin of the Late Wisconsin     Ice Sheet." American Journal of
       Science, 253:649-58 (1955).
158.   Flint,Richard Foster, personal communication.
159.   Flint, R. F., and Deevey, E. S., "Radiocarbon Dating of Late
       Pleistocene Events." American Journal of Science, v. 249, No. 4

       (April, 1951).
160.   Flint,R. F., and Dorsey, H. G., "lowan and Tazewell Drifts and
       the North American Ice Sheet." American Journal of Science,
       v. 243,    No.      11, p.   627 (1945)-
161.   Flint,   R.   F.,   and Dorsey, H.           G., "Glaciation of Siberia." Bulletin

       of the Geological Society of America, 56:89-106 (1945).
162.   Flint, R. F., and Dorsey, H. G., "Radiocarbon Dates of Pre-Man-
       kato Events in Eastern and Central North America." Science, v.
       121,   No. 3149 (May           6, 1955).

163.   Forbes,    W.    H.,    "On    the    Anatomy of the Indian Elephant."           Pro-
       ceedings of the Royal Society of            London, 1879, PP- 4 2O~35-
164.   Forrest,   H. Edward, The Atlantean Continent, London, Witherby,
       1933-
165.   Foster, J.     W., Pre-Historic Races of the United                States.   Chicago,
       Griggs, 1887.
166.   Frank, Phillip, review of Essay in Physics, by Lord Samuel.                     New
       York Times Book Review (Feb. 17, 1952).
167.   Frankland, John M., personal communication.
168.   Frankland, John M., conference.
169.   Gamow, George, Biography                 of the Earth.    New   York, Viking, 1948.
170.   Geikie, Sir Archibald, Text                  Book   of Geology, 3d ed.   New    York
       and London, Macmillan,                1893.
171.   George, T. Neville, "Geology." Science Progress, v. XLIII, No.
       169 (Jan., 1955).
172.   Gerard, R. W., "Experiments in Micro-Evolution." Science, v.
       120,   No. 3123 (Nov.          5,   1954).
173.   Gidley, James Williams, Notice of the Occurrence of a Pleistocene
       Camel North of the Arctic Circle. Smithsonian Miscellaneous Col-
       lections, v. 60,      No. 26 (March     Publication number 2173.
                                                    21, 1913).

174.   Gilligan, Albert,        "A Contribution
                                          to the Geologic History of the
       North Atlantic Region." Presidential address before the Yorkshire
       Geological Society. Reprinted in the Annual Report of the Smith-
                              BIBLIOGRAPHY                                            405
        sonian Institution, 1932, pp. 207-22. Washington, Government
        Printing Office, 1933.
175.    Gilluly, James, "Geologic Contrasts Between Continents and
        Ocean     Basins." See Poldervaart.

176.    Gold, T., "Instability of the Earth's Axis of Rotation." Nature,                v.

        175,   No. 4456, pp. 526-29 (March        26, 1955).

177.    Goldring, Winifred, "Algal Barrier Reefs in the Lower Ozarkian
        of New York." New York State Museum Bulletin, No. 315. Albany,
        University of New York, 1938.
178.    Goldring, Winifred,      "Handbook         of Paleontology for Beginners
        and Amateurs. Part       I.   The     Fossils."New York State Museum
        Handbook  9. Albany, University of New York, 1950.

179.    Goldschmidt, Richard, "Different Philosophies of Genetics."                    Sci-

        ence, v. 119, No. 3099    (May   21, 1954).
180.    Goldschmidt, Richard, The Material Basis of Evolution.                        New
        Haven, Yale, 1940."
181.    Good, Ronald, "The Present Position of the Theory of Conti-
        nental Drift." Nature, v. 166, No. 4223 (Oct. 7, 1950).
182.    Gordianko, in the      Red    Star,   May    18,   1954.
183. Grabau, Amadeus W., The Rhythm of the Ages; Earth History in
     the Light of the Pulsation and Polar Control Theories. Peking,
        Vetch, 1940.
184.    Grabau, Amadeus W.,A Textbook of Geology. Part II: Historical
        Geology.    New
                   York, Heath, 1920.
185. Graham, John W., "Evidence of Polar Shift Since Triassic Time."
     Journal of Geophysical Research, v. 60, No. 3 (Sept., 1955).
186. Graham, John W., "Rock Magnetism." In Tuve, Annual Report

        for 1955-1956 (which see).
187.    Graham, John W., personal communication.
188.    Graham, J. W., Torreson, O. W., and Bowles,                E.,"Magnetic Polar-
        ization of Silurian Sediments of the Eastern               United States." Ab-
        stract,  Transactions of the American Geophysical Union, v. 31,
        No. 328 (1950).
189.    Gray, George W., "The Lamont Geological Observatory." Scien-
        tific American, v. 195, No. 6 (Dec., 1956).

iSga.   Greene, Walter, personal communication.
190.    Gregory, Joseph T., "Vertebrates in the Geologic                 Time   Scale." See
        Poldervaart.

191.    Gregory,   J. W., "Geological History of the Pacific Ocean." Nature,
        v. 125,  No. 3159 (May 17, 1930).
192.    Griffiths, D. H., and King, R. F., "Natural Magnetization of

        Igneous and Sedimentary Rocks." Nature, v. 173, No. 4415, pp.
        1114-16.
406                      EARTH'S SHIFTING CRUST
193.    Griggs, David, "A Theory of Mountain Building." American Jour-
        nal of Science, 237:611-50.
194.    Gutenberg, Beno, ed., Internal Constitution of the Earth. New
        York, Dover, 1951.
195.    Gutenberg, B., and Richter, C. F., Seismicity of the Earth and
        Associated Phenomena. Princeton, University Press, 1950.
196.    Halle, T. B., "On the Geological Structure of the Falk Islands."
        Bulletin of the Geological Institute of the University of Upsala,
        11:115-229.
197. Hamilton, Edwin L., "Upper Cretaceous, Tertiary, and Recent
     Planktonic Foraminifera from the Mid-Pacific Flat-Topped Sea
     Mounts." Journal of Paleontology, 27:207-37.
198. Hansen, Henry P., "Postglacial Forest Succession and Climate in
     the Oregon Cascades." American Journal of Science, v. 244, No.
        10 (Oct., 1946).
199.    Hansen, L. Taylor, Some Considerations of and Additions to the
        Taylor-Wegner Hypothesis of Continental Displacement. Pam-
        phlet copyrighted July, 1946, by L. Taylor Hansen, 1158 W. 35th
        St., Los Angeles 7, Cal. (In the New York Public Library.)

sjoo.   Hapgood, Mrs. Norman (Elizabeth Reynolds), translation of the
        report on the stomach contents of the Beresovka mammoth (un-
        published). See Sukachev.
soi.    Hardy, M.    E.,   The Geography   of Plants. Oxford, University Press,
        1920.
202.    Harris, Herbert,     "The Amazing Frozen Foods      Industry." Science
        Digest, v. 29, No. 2 (Feb., 1951). (Condensed     from The Reporter,
        Oct. 24, 1950.)
203.    Hartnagel, C. A., and Bishop, Sherman C., "The Mastodons, Mam-
        moths and Other Pleistocene Mammals of New York State." New
        York State Museum Bulletins 241-242. Albany, 1922.
204.    Haskell, N. A., "The Motions of a Viscous Fluid under a Surface
        Load." Physics, 6:265-69 (1935); 7*56-31 (1936).
205.    Heezen, Bruce C., and Ewing, Maurice, "Turbidity Currents and
        Submarine Slumps, and the 1929 Grand Banks Earthquake."
        Lamont Geological Observatory Contribution No. 65. American
                         v. 250 (Dec.,
        Journal of Science,            1952).
206. Henry, Thomas R., The White Continent. New York, William
     Sloane Associates, 1950.
207. Henry, Thomas R., "Poles Wander; Earth Crust Falls Off." North
        American Newspaper Alliance          (Jan. 27, 1952).
208.    Herz, O.   F.,   "Frozen   Mammoth    in Siberia." Smithsonian Reports,

        *93-
209.    Hess, H. H.,  "Comments on Mountain Building." Transactions of
        the   American Geophysical Union, V: 528-31.
                                  BIBLIOGRAPHY                                      407

*io. Hess, H. H., "Drowned Ancient Islands of the Pacific Basin."
     Smithsonian Reports, 1947.
211. Hibben, Frank C., "Evidence of Early Man in Alaska." American

     Antiquity, VIII: 256 (1943).
212. Hibben, Frank C., The Lost Americans. New York, Crowell, 1946.

213. Hibben, Frank C., Treasure in the Dust. Philadelphia and New
        York, Lippincott, 1951.
214.    Hillaby, John, "Earth as Magnet Said to Weaken."                      New   York
        Times (Dec. 26, 1956).
215.    Hobbs, William H., Earth Evolution and   Its Facial Expression.
        New  York, Macmillan, 1922.
216.    Hobbs, William H., Earth Features and Their Meaning. New
        York, Macmillan, 1935.
217.    Hobbs, William H., "Repeating Patterns in the Relief and in the
        Structure of the Land." Bulletin of the Geological Society of
     America, v. 22 (1911).
218. Hobbs, William H., "The Correlations of Fracture Systems and
     the Evidence for Planetary Dislocations within the Earth's Crust."

     Reprinted from Transactions of the Wisconsin Academy of Sci-
        ences, Arts    and    Letters,   XV 115-29   (Aug., 1905).
219. Hobbs, William H., "Eurasian Continental Glacier of the Late
     Pleistocene." Science, v. 104, No. 2692 (Aug. 2, 1946).
220.    Hodgman and                Handbook of Chemistry and
                              Lange,                                    Physics. Cleve-
        land, Chemical        Rubber Publishing Co., 1927.
221.    Hoffman, Bernhard  C., "Implications of Radiocarbon Datings for
        the Origins of Dorset Culture." American Antiquity, v. XVIII,
        No.   i
                  (July, 1952).
222. Horberg, Leland, "Radiocarbon Dates and Pleistocene Geological
     Problems of the Mississippi Valley Region." Journal of Geology,
     v. 63, No. 3 (May, 1955).

223. Hospers, J., "Rock Magnetism and Pole Wandering." Journal of
        Geology,     v. 63,No. i (Jan., 1955).
224.    Hough,      Jack, "Pacific Climatic Record in a Pacific           Ocean Core
        Sample." Journal of Geology,          v. 61,   No.   3 (May, 1953).
225.    Hough, Jack, "Pleistocene Lithology of Antarctic Ocean Bottom
        Sediments." Journal of Geology, 58:257-59.
2253.   Howorth, H. H., "The Mammoth and the Flood." Geological Mag-
            New Series, 8:309-15 (1881).
        azine,
226. Hubbert, M. King, and Melton, F. A., "Isostasy, A Critical Re-
     view." Journal of Geology, v. 38, No. 8 (Nov.-Dec., 1930).
227. Hubbert, M. King, personal communication.
228. "Humble Oil Radiocarbon Dates I." H. R. Brannon, Jr., et al.
     Science, v. 125, No. 3239 (Jan. 25, 1957).
229. "Humble Oil Radiocarbon Dates II." Brannon, Simons, Perry,
408                   EARTH'S SHIFTING CRUST
       Daughtry, and McFarlan. Science, v. 125, No. 3254 (May 10, 1957)
230.   Humphreys, A. A., and Abbot, H. L., Report on the Physics ant
       Hydraulics of the Mississippi River. Washington, Governmen
       Printing Office, 1867.
231.   Humphreys, W.            J.,   Physics of the Air. Philadelphia, Lippincott
       1920.
232.   Huntington, Ellsworth, The Pulse of Asia. Boston and                    New    York
       Houghton       Mifflin, 1907.

233.   International Bathymetric Chart of the Oceans.                      Monte Carlo
       Monaco, International Hydrographic Bureau.
234.   Jaggar,     Thomas       A.,   "Living on a Volcano." National Geography
       Magazine,     v.   LXVIII, No.          i
                                                   (July, 1935).
235.   Jaggar, Thomas A., Volcanoes Declare War. Honolulu, Paradise
       of the Pacific, 1945.
236.   Jannsen,     Raymond           E.,   "The History    of a River." Scientific   Amer
       ican (June, 1952).
237.   Jardetsky, W. S., "The Principal Characteristics of the Formatioi
       of the Earth's Crust." Science, 119:361-65 (March 19, 1954).
238.   Jeffreys,   Harold,      The     Earth, 2d ed.    New York, Macmillan, 1929.
239.   Jeffreys,   Harold, The Earth, 3d ed.               New York, Cambridge Uni
       versity Press, 1953.
240.   Jeffreys,   Harold, The Theory of Probability. Oxford, Clarendon


241.   Jeffreys,   Harold, personal communication.
242.   Johnson, Frederick,             ed.,   "Radiocarbon Dating." Memoirs of          th(

       Society for American Archeology,              No. 8 (1951). Salt Lake City,      B   T




       the Society.
243.   Johnson, L. H.,            "Men and          Elephants in America."      Scientific

       Monthly      (Oct., 1952).
244.   Joly,J., "The Theory of Thermal Cycles." Gerlands Beitrdge zu

       Geophysik, XIX: 4 15-41 (1928).
245.   Kahn, Fritz, Design of the Universe. New York, Crown, 1954.
246.   Kalb, Bernhard, "Adventure on the Mysterious Continent." Nev
       York Times Magazine (Feb. 19, 1954).
247.   Karlstrom, Thor, "Tentative Correlation of Alaskan Glacial                       Se

       quences." Science, v. 125, No. 3237 (Jan. 11, 1957).
248.   Kelly, Allan O., and Dachille, Frank, Target Earth. Pensacola
       Florida, Pensacola Engraving, 1953. (In the library of the                     Amei
       ican Museum of Natural History, New York.)
249.   Kent, William,           The Mechanical         Engineer's Pocket-Book, 8th ed
       New York,  Wiley, 1913.
250.   Kimball, Arthur L., College Physics, 2d rev. ed.                 New   York, Holt


251.   King, Lester       C.,   "The        Necessity for Continental Drift." Bulletin
                                        BIBLIOGRAPHY                                       409

       of the    American Association of Petroleum Geologists, 37:2163-77
       (July-Sept., 1953).
252.   Kingdon-Ward, F., "Caught in the Assam-Tibet Earthquake."
       National Geographic Magazine, v. CI, No. 3 (March, 1952).
253.   Knowlton, F. H., "The Evolution of Geological Climates." Bulletin
       of the Geological Society of America, 30:499-566 (1919).
254.   Knowlton, F. H., The Fossil Forests of Yellowstone National Park.
     Washington, Department of the Interior, 1914.
255. Koppen, Vladimir, "Das Klima Patagoniens im Tertiar und
     Quartiar." Gerlands Beitrdge zur Geophysik, 17:391-94 (1927).
256. Kreichgauer, Damian, Die Aequatorfrage in der Geologic, 2d ed.
       Steyl, Haldenkirche, 1926.
257.   Kroeber, Alfred Louis, Anthropology, rev. ed.                       New     York, Har-
       court, Brace, 1948.
258.   Krumbein, W. C., and Sloss, L. I., Stratigraphy and Sedimentation.
       San Francisco, Freeman, 1951.
259.   Kulp, J. Laurence, and Carr, Donald R., "Surface Area of Deep-
       Sea Currents." Journal of Geology, v. 60, No. 2 (March, 1952).
260.   Lack, D. L., "Darwin's Finches." Scientific American, v. 188, No. 16
       (April, 1953).
261.   Ladd, Harold S., and Brown, Roland W., "Fossils Lift the Veil of
       Time." National Geographic Magazine, v. CIX, No. 3 (March,
       1956).
262.   "Lamont Natural Radiocarbon Measurements                             I,"   J.   Laurence
       Kulp. Science, v. 114, No. 2970 (Nov. 30, 1951).
263.   "Lamont Natural Radiocarbon Measurements         II," J. L. Kulp
                             No. 3016 (Oct. 17, 1952).
       et al. Science, v. 116,

264.   "Lamont Natural Radiocarbon Measurements III," Broecker,
       Kulp, and Tucek. Science, v. 124, No. 3213 (July 27, 1956).
265.   Landes, Kenneth K., Petroleum Geology. New York, Wiley, 1951.
266.   Lane, F. C., The Story of Mountains. New York, Doubleday, 1950.
267.   Lane, F. C., The Mysterious Sea. Garden City, N. Y., Doubleday,
       1947-
268.   Laplace, Marquis P.               S.   de,   Mecanique   celeste.   Translated with a
       commentary by Nathaniel Bowditch. Boston, Little Brown, 1839.
       4 vols.
269.   Leighton,             M. M., and Wright, H.            E.,   "Radiocarbon Dates of
       Mankato              Drift in Minnesota." Science, v. 125, No. 3256             (May   24,
       1957).
270.   Levitt,        J.,   "The Mechanics          of Freezing." Science, v. 125, 'No. 3240

       (Feb.     i,    1957).
271.   Levy,     Hyman, ModernScience. New York, Knopf, 1938.

272.   Libby, Willard      Radiocarbon Dating. Chicago, University of
                                  F.,

       Chicago, 1952. See also "Chicago Radiocarbon Dates."
410                    EARTH'S SHIFTING CRUST
273.   Loffelholz von Colberg, Carl Freiherr, Die Drehungen                              der
       Erdkruste in geologischen Zeitraumen, 2d ed. Munich, 1895.
274.   The London Times           (Sept. 9, 1954).
275.   Longfellow, Dwight W., "Continental Drift and Earth's Magnetic
       Poles and Foci." Pan-American Geologist, v. LV, No. 3 (April,
       193 1 )-
276.   Louisiana Department of Conservation, Bulletin No. 8.
277.   Lucas, Frederick A., "The Truth about the Mammoth." Annual
       Report of the Smithsonian Institution, 1899, pp. 353-59.
278.   Lull, Richard Swann, Organic Evolution. New York, Macmillan,
       1927.
279.   Luyet, B.     J., and Gehenio,
                                      P. M., Life and Death        at   Low Tempera-
       tures.     Normandy, Mo., Biodynamica, 1940.
280.   Lydekker,       Richard,    "Mammoth          Ivory."   Smithsonian        Reports,
       1899, pp. 361-66.
281.   Lyell, Sir Charles, Principles of Geology, rev. (gih) ed.               New    York,
       Appleton, 1854.
282.   Lyell, Sir Charles,        The Antiquity       of   Man, 4th     ed.,   rev.   Phila-

       delphia, Lippincott, 1873.
283.   Lyell, Sir Charles, Travels in        North America.       New      York, Wiley,
       1852.
284.   Lyman, Charles P., personal communication.
285.   Ma, Ting Ying H., Research on the Past Climate and Continental
       Drift, Vol. L The Climate and Relative Positions of Eurasia and
       North America during the Ordovician Period as Determined by
       the Growth Rate of Corals. Fukien, China, published by the
       author, July, 1943. (Professor Ma was at this time head of the
       Department of Oceanography of the China Institute of Geog-
       raphy.)
286.   Ma, Ting Ying H., Research on the Past Climate, etc. Vol. II.
       The Climate and Relative Positions of the Continents during the
       Silurian Period as Determined by the Growth Rate of Corals.
       Fukien, published by the author, August, 1943.
287.   Ma, Ting Ying H., Research on the Past Climate,                     etc.   Vol.   HI.
       The Climate and Relative Positions of the Continents during the
       Devonian Period. Fukien, published by the author, November,
       1943-
288.   Ma, Ting Ying H., Research on the Past Climate, etc. Vol. IV.
       The Equator and the Relative Positions of the Continents during
       the Cretaceous Period as Deduced from the Distribution and
       Growth Values of Reef Corals. Taipei, Taiwan (Formosa), pub-
       lished by the author, August, 1951. (Professor Ma has been con-
       nected since this time with Taiwan National University.)
289.   Ma, Ting Ying H., Research on the Past Climate, etc. Vol. V.
                                   BIBLIOGRAPHY                                 411

        The  Shifting in Pole-Positions with Diastrophisms since the End
        of the Cretaceous, and the Accompanying Drift of Continents. (22
        plates,    i   chart, 7 figures.) Taipei,   Taiwan (Formosa), published
        by the author, May, 1952.
290.    Ma, Ting Ying H., Research on the Past Climate, etc. Vol. VI.
        The Sudden Total Displacement of the Outer Solid Earth Shell
        by Slidings Relative to the Fixed Rotating Core of the Earth.
        Taipei,    Taiwan (Formosa).

        NOTE: These volumes are available at the Schermerhorn
        Library, Columbia University. They may also be obtained
        from the World Book Co., Ltd., 99 Chung King Road, ist
        section, Taipei,      Taiwan (Formosa), China.

291.    Ma, Ting Ying H., "Alteration of Sedimentary Facies on the
        Ocean Bottom and Shortness of the Period of Diastrophism after
        a Sudden Total Displacement of the Solid Earth Shell." Oceano-
        graphica Sinica,      v. II, Fasc. I (Sept., 1955).

2913.    Malaise, Rene", "Oceanic   Bottom Investigations and Their Bear-
         ings     on Geology." Reprinted from Geologiska Foreningens I.
       Stockholm, Forhandlingar (March-April, 1957).
29 ib. Mallery, Arlington H., Lost America. Washington, Overlook, 1956.
292. Manson, Marsden, "The Evolution of Climates." Revised and re-
        printed from         The American      Geologist.     Minneapolis, Franklin,
        1903-
293.    Marriott, R. A.,        Warmer Winters and          the Earth's Tilt. Exeter,

        England, Pollard, 1921.
294.    Mather, Kirtley F., conference.
2943. Matthes,          Francois   E.,   "Rebirth of the Glaciers in the Sierra
        Nevada during Late          Post-Pleistocene Time." Bulletin of the Geo-
                        America, v. 52, No. 12, Pt. 2, p. 2030.
        logical Society of
295.    Matthew, W. D., Climate and Evolution, 2d ed. New York,                 New
        York Academy of Sciences, 1939.
296.    Maxwell, James Clerk, "On a Dynamical Top." The Scientific
        Papers of James Clerk Maxwell, Vol. I., edited by W. D. Niven,
        M.A., F.R.S., Cambridge, University Press, 1890. (2 vols.)
297.    Mayo, Captain Charles A., conference.
298.    Mayor, A. G., "Growth Rate of Samoan Corals." Papers from the
        Department of Marine Biology of the Carnegie Institution of
        Washington, Vol. XIX. Some Posthumous Papers of A. G. Mayor,
        pp. 5 1-72.
299.    Meinesz, F. A. Vening, "Indonesian Archipelago: A Geophysical
        Study." Bulletin of the Geological Society of America, v. 65, No. 2,
         pp. 143-64 (Feb., 1954).
412                       EARTH'S SHIFTING CRUST
300.   Meinesz, F. A. Vening, "Major Tectonic Phenomena and the
       Hypothesis of Convection Currents in the Earth." Quarterly Jour-
       nal of the Geological Society of London, 103:191-207 (Jan. 31,
       1948).
301.   Meinesz, F. A. Vening, "Shear Patterns of the Earth's Crust."
       Transactions of the American Geophysical Union, 28:1-61 (1947).
302.   Menard, Henry W., "Fractures in the Pacific Floor." Scientific
       American,        v. 193,   No.   i
                                              (July, 1955).
303.   Merrill,        Elmer    D., Plant Life of the Pacific World.             New   York,
       Macmillan, 1945.
304.   Meryman, Harold            T.,   "Mechanics of Freezing in Living Cells and
       Tissues." Science, v. 124, No. 3221 (Sept. 21, 1956).
305.   Meryman, Harold             T., [Reply to Levitt]. Science, v. 125,         No. 3240
       (Feb.     i,    1957).
       Michigan Radiocarbon Dates. See "University of Michigan Radio-
       carbon Dates."
306.   Miller,        Arthur Austin, The Skin of the Earth. London, Methuen,
       1953-
307.   Miller,        Hugh, The Old Red Sandstone, i4th                    ed.   Edinburgh,
       Nimmo,          1871.
308.         John, "The Glacial Period and Drayson's Hypothesis."
       Millis,

     Popular Astronomy, v. 30, No. 10. Reprinted for the Fortean So-
     ciety by K. M. McMahon, 1945.
309. Moodie, Roy L., A Popular Guide to the Nature and the Environ-
     ment of the Fossil Vertebrates of New York. Albany, University of
       the State of        New    York, 1933.
310.   Moody, Paul A., Introduction                   to Evolution.   New    York, Harper,
       1953-
311.   Moore, Raymond C., "Late Paleozoic Cyclic Sedimentation in the
                                            1'
       Central United States.  1950. Reprinted from the International
       Geological Congress, Report of the i8th Session, Great Britain
       1948, Pt. IV.
312.   Muench, O.    "Determining Geological Age from Radioactivity."
                          B.,

     Scientific Monthly, v. LXXI, No. 5 (Nov., 1950).
313. Munk, W. H., "Polar Wandering: A Marathon of Errors." Nature,
     v. 177, No. 4508, p. 551.

314. Munk, Walter, and Revelle, Roger, "Sea Level and the Rotation
     of the Earth." American Journal of Science, 250:829-33 (Nov.,

       1952).
315.   Munk, Walter, and            Revelle, Roger,           "Remarks   at the Geophysical

       Congress in Rome,             1954."       New York      Herald Tribune (Nov.      9,

       1954)-
316.   Murray, Raymond C., "Directions of Ice Motion in South-Central
       Newfoundland." Journal of Geology, v. 63, No. 3 (May, 1955).
