                                                                         f
  ¥ AK 0* THUNCPT <F.A KINGS    Charles Hapgood’s classic 1966
                               book on ancient maps is back in
                               print after 20 years. Hapgood
                                produces concrete evidence of an
                                advanced world-wide civilization

                                ^
                                existing many thousands of years
                                 before ancient Egypt . He has
                                 found the evidence in many
                                  beautiful maps long known to
                                  scholars, the Piri Reis Map that
                                  shows Antarctica, the Hadji
                                  Ahmed map. the Oronteus
                                  Finaeus and other amazing
                                   maps. Hapgood con eluded that
                                   these maps were made from
                                   more ancient maps from the
                                   various ancient archives
                                   around the world , now lost.
                                   Hapgood also concluded that
                                   the ancient mapmakers were in
                                   some ways much more
                                > advanced scientifically than
                                    16 th century Europe , the
                                    ancient civilizations of Greece.
                                    Egypt , and Babylonia. Not
                                    only were these unknown
                                     people more advanced in
                                     map- making than any people
                                      prior to the 18th century, it
                                      appears they mapped all the
                                      continents. The Americas
                                       were mapped thousands of
                                       years before Columbus.
                                       Antarctica was mapped
                                        when its coasts were free of
                                        ice. There is evidence that
                                        these people must have
                                        lived when the ice age had
                                        not yet ended in the
                                         Northern Hemisphere and
                                         when Alaska was still
                                         connected with Siberia by
              ISBN   0-135813-42-1
                                    m  ^ the Pleistocene, ice age
                                          “land bridge.”
        MAPI OF THE
      ANCIENT SEA KINGS
Evidence of Advanced Civilization in the Ice Age
MAPS OF THE ANCIENT SEA KINGS


© 1966 Charles Hapgood
This edition © 1996


ISBN 0 -932813- 42-9



Printed in the United States of America


Published by
Adventures Unlimited Press
One Adventure Place
Kempton , Illinois 60946 USA




Adventures Unlimited gives permission for
the free use of any of the material in this
book . We ask only that a copy be sent to us.
A Word of Appreciation

          Discoveries are often made by persons who, having fastened
onto suggestions made by others, follow them through . This is the
case with this book, which is the result of seven years of intensive
research undertaken as the result of a suggestion made by someone else.
          That person is Captain Arlington H . Mallery. He first suggested
that the Piri Re’is Map, brought to light in 1929 but drawn in
1513 and based upon much older maps, showed a part of Antarctica .
It was he who made the original suggestion that the first map of
this coast must have been drawn before the present immense Antarctic
ice cap had covered the coasts of Queen Maud Land . His sensational
suggestion was the inspiration for our research .
          It is therefore with deep appreciation that I dedicate this
book to Captain Arlington H. Mallery.
  ]IR ORBISVNIVERSAUS 1VXTA PTOL<
1 IRKR VSPVCIIALIORQVE LVSTRATK
MAPS OF THE ANCIENT SEA KINGS
ZATION IN THE ICE AGE
El @SMGR\PHI TR\DITKS>EMETAME
ES APETRO APIANO LElfSNKSEMB m
'EVIDENCE OF ADVANCED CIVILI
BY CHARLES H. HAPGOOD, F. R. G.S.
     The author wishes to express his gratitude to the following
for permission to reprint material in this volume :

     Abelard -Schuman , Limited , New York . Greek Science in Antiquity by Mar-
shall Clagett. Copyright © 1955.
     Material from Admiral of the Ocean Sea by Samuel Eliot Morison . Copyright
© 1942 by Samuel Eliot Morison. Reprinted by permission of Atlantic-Little,
Brown and Company, Boston .
     E. J . Brill , Ltd ., Leiden , The Netherlands. Hallucinations Scientifiques ( Les
Portolans ) by Prince Youssouf Kama ). Copyright © 1937.
     E. J . Brill, Ltd ., Leiden , The Netherlands, and the Editorial Board . Encyclo-
paedia of Islam , edited by M . Th . Houtsma , et al . Copyright © 1936.
     Cambridge University Press, New York . Science and Civilization in China ,
Vol . Ill by J . Needham . Copyright © 1959.
     Harvard University Press, Cambridge, Massachusetts. Travel and Discovery in
the Renaissance , 1420-1620 by Boies Penrose. Copyright © 1955.
     The National Library, Ankara , Turkey. The Oldest Map of America by Dr.
A. Afet Inan , translated by Dr. Leman Yolac. Copyright © 1954.
     The Royal Danish Geographical Society, Copenhagen , Denmark . Ptolemy’ s
 Maps of Northern Europe : A Reconstruction of the Prototypes by Gudmund
Schiitt . H . Hagcrup, Copenhagen , 1917.
     The Map Collectors Circle, London , England , for use of the Buache map of
Antarctica .
    Twayne Publishers, Inc., New York , for permission to trace the map of the
mouths of the St . Lawrence River in Explorations in America Before Columbus by
Hjalmar R . Holand . Copyright © 1956.




       Maps adapted by Caru Studios, Inc., N.Y., N.Y., from drawings by
                           Charles H. Hapgood.
        MAPS OF THE
      ANCIENT SEA KINGS
Evidence of Advanced Civilization in the Ice Age




                         .
            by Charles H Hapgood
Preface

           This book contains the story of the discovery of the first hard evidence
that advanced peoples preceded all the peoples now known to history . In one field ,
ancient sea charts, it appears that accurate information has been passed down
from people to people. It appears that the charts must have originated with a
people unknown ; that they were passed on , perhaps by the Minoans ( the Sea
Kings of ancient Crete ) and the Phoenicians, who were for a thousand years and
more the greatest sailors of the ancient world . We have evidence that they were
collected and studied in the great library of Alexandria and that compilations of
them were made by the geographers who worked there.
           Before the catastrophe of the destruction of the great library many of
the maps must have been transferred to other centers, chiefly, perhaps, to Con -
stantinople, which remained a center of learning through the Middle Ages. We can
only speculate that the maps may have been preserved there until the Fourth
Crusade ( 1204 A .D.) when the Venetians captured the city. Some of the maps ap-
pear in the west in the century following this “ wrong way ” crusade ( for the Vene-
tian fleet was supposed to sail for the Holy Land!). Others do not appear until
the early 16th Century.
           Most of these maps were of the Mediterranean and the Black Sea . But
maps of other areas survived . These included maps of the Americas and maps of
the Arctic and Antarctic seas. It becomes clear that the ancient voyagers traveled
from pole to pole. Unbelievable as it may appear , the evidence nevertheless indi-
cates that some ancient people explored the coasts of Antarctica when its coasts
were free of ice. It is clear, too, that they had an instrument of navigation for
accurately finding the longitudes of places that was far superior to anything pos-
sessed by the peoples of ancient, medieval, or modern times until the second half
of the 18th Century.
           This evidence of a lost technology will support and give credence to
many other evidences that have been brought forward in the last century or more
to support the hypothesis of a lost civilization in remote times. Scholars have been
able to dismiss most of that evidence as mere myth , but here we have evidence
that cannot be dismissed . This evidence requires that all the other evidence that
has been brought forward in the past should be reexamined with an open mind .
           To the inevitable question , are these remarkable maps genuine, I can
only reply that they have all been known for a long time, with one exception . The
Piri Re’is Map of 1513 was only rediscovered in 1929, but its authenticity, as will
be seen , is sufficiently established . To the further question , why didn’t somebody
else discover all this before, I can only reply that new discoveries usually seem
self -evident, by hindsight.
                                                                           C. H . H .
                    Contents


Preface                                               vn
Foreword by Dr . John K . Wright                       IX
Chapter I     The Treasure Hunt Begins                  1
Chapter II     The Secrets of the Piri Re’is Map        5
Chapter III    The Piri Re’is Map in Detail            39
Chapter IV      The Antarctic Maps of Oronteus        79
                   Finaeus, Hadji Ahmed , and
                     Mercator
Chapter V      Ancient Maps of the East and West      113
Chapter VI      The Ancient Maps of the North         149
Chapter VII      The Scientific Implications of the
                    Maps                              181
Chapter VIII      A Civilization That Vanished        193
Acknowledgments                                       207
Notes                                                 209
Appendix                                              248
Geographical Tables                                   254
Bibliography                                          292
Index                                                 301
Foreword


           The geographer and geologist William Morris Davis once discussed “The
Value of Outrageous Geological Hypotheses.” * His point was that such hypothe-
ses arouse interest , invite attack, and thus serve useful fermentative purposes in
the advancement of geology . Mr . Hapgood will agree, I am sure, that this book
records a mighty proliferation of outrageous cartographical and historical hypoth -
                                                                                    -
eses, as luxuriant as an equatorial vine. His hypotheses will “ outrage” the conserva
tive instincts of historically minded cartographers and cartographically minded
historians. But while those in whom conservatism predominates will react to this
book like bulls to red rags, those of radical, iconoclastic bent will react like bees
to honeysuckle, and the liberals in between will experience a feeling of stimulating
bafflement .
           A map dating from 1513, and by the Turkish Admiral , Piri Re’is, is the
seed from which the vine has grown . Only the western half of the map has been
preserved . It shows the Atlantic coasts from France and the Caribbean on the
 north to what Hapgood ( following Captain A . H . Mallery ) holds to be Antarctica
on the south ; and , of course, the proposition that any part of Antarctica could
have been mapped before 1513 is startling. But yet more startling are the further
propositions that have arisen from the intensive studies that Mr. Hapgood and
his students have made of this and other late medieval and early modern maps.
These studies, which took seven years, have convinced him that the maps were
derived from prototypes drawn in pre- Hellenic times ( perhaps even as early as the
last Ice Age!) , that these older maps were based upon a sophisticated understand   -
                                                           —
 ing of the spherical trigonometry of map projections, and what seems even more
           —
 incredible upon a detailed and accurate knowledge of the latitudes and longitudes
of coastal features throughout a large part of the world .
           In my opinion , Mr. Hapgood ’s ingenuity in developing his basic concept
 regarding the accuracy of the maps is fascinating and accounts for the book’s most
 valuable contribution . Whether or not one accepts his “ identifications ” and his
 “solutions,” he has posed hypotheses that cry aloud for further testing. Besides
 this, his suggestions as to what might explain the disappearance of civilizations




     *   Science , vol . 63, 1926, pp. 463-468.
sufficiently advanced in science and navigation to have produced the hypothetical
lost prototypes of the maps that he has studied raise interesting philosophical and
ethical questions . Had “Sportin’ Life” in Porgy and Bess read this book, he would
have been inspired to sing : “ it ain’t nessa . . . it ain’t ncssa . . . it ain’t neces-
sarily not so.”

                                                                 John K. Wright,
                                                                 Lyme, New Hampshire
                                                                 June 7, 1965




                                   John K . Wright , who did his undergraduate work at
                             Harvard and also received his Ph D . in history from that
                             university , was with the American Geographical Society in
                             New York for thirty -six years lie was director of the society
                                                             ,

                              for the last eleven years of his association with it . His latest
                             work . Human Nature in Geography , has fust been pub -
                             lished by the Harvard University Press .
        MAPS OF THE
      ANCIENT SEA KINGS
Evidence o f Advanced Civilization in the Ice Age
   o

   CHAP
   TER I
    THE
TREASURE &
   HUNT
V BEGINS !
                     In 1929, in the old Imperial Palace in Constantinople, a map
                was found that caused great excitement . It was painted on parch -
                ment, and dated in the month of Muharrem in the Moslem year
                919, which is 1513 in the Christian calendar. It was signed with
                the name of Piri Ibn Haji Memmed, an admiral of the Turkish
                navy known to us as Piri Re’is.1
                     The map aroused attention because, from the date, it appeared
                to be one of the earliest maps of America . In 1929 the Turks were
                passing through a phase of intense nationalism under the leader-
                ship of Kemal, and they were delighted to find an early map of
                America drawn by a Turkish geographer. Furthermore, examina -
                tion showed that this map differed significantly from all the other
                maps of America drawn in the 16th Century because it showed
                South America and Africa in correct relative longitudes. This was
                most remarkable, for the navigators of the 16 th Century had no
                means of finding longitude except by guesswork .
                     Another detail of the map excited special attention . In one
                of the legends inscribed on the map by Piri Re’is, he stated that
                he had based the western part of it on a map that had been drawn
                by Columbus . This was indeed an exciting statement because for
                several centuries geographers had been trying without success to
                find a “ lost map of Columbus” supposed to have been drawn by
                 him in the West Indies. Turkish and German scholars made
studies of the map. Articles were written in the learned journals, and even in the
popular press.2
     One of the popular articles, published in the Illustrated London News ( l ),3

    1
       From his title, Re’is, “admiral.” Pronounced “ Peeree Ry-iss.” See Note 1.
    2
       See the Bibliography, Nos. 1, 2, 5, 6, 23, 27, 28, 36, 40, 61, 78, 83, 104, 105,
106, 109, 115, 117, 154, 181, 187, 208, 215.
     3
       Figures referring to specific sources listed in the Bibliography are inserted
in parentheses throughout the text. The first number indicates the correspondingly
numbered work in the Bibliography, and a number following a colon indicates the
page in the work.
2   Maps of the Ancient Sea Kings
caught the eye of the American Secretary of State Henry Stimson. Stimson
 thought it would be worthwhile to try to discover the actual source Piri Reis had
 used , a map which had supposedly been drawn by Columbus and which might
 still be lying about somewhere in Turkey. Accordingly, he ordered the American
 Ambassador in Turkey to request that an investigation be made.4 The Turkish
 Government complied , but no source maps were found .
       Piri Re’ is made other interesting statements about his source maps. He used
about twenty, he said , and he stated that some of them had been drawn in the
time of Alexander the Great, and some of them had been based on mathematics.6
The scholars who studied the map in the 1930’s could credit neither statement .
It appears now, however, that both statements were essentially correct.
       After a time, the map lost its public interest , and it was not accepted by
scholars as a map by Columbus. No more was heard of it until, by a scries of
curious chances, it aroused attention in Washington , D.C., in 1956. A Turkish
naval officer had brought a copy of the map to the U .S. Navy Hydrographic
Office as a gift (although , unknown to him , facsimiles already existed in the Library
of Congress and other leading libraries in the United States ). The map had been
referred to a cartographer on the staff , M. I . Walters.
       Walters happened to refer the map to a friend of his, a student of old maps,
and a breaker of new ground in borderland regions of archaeology, Captain Arling-
ton II . Mallery. Mallery, after a distinguished career as an engineer, navigator, ar-
chaeologist , and author ( 130 ), had devoted some years to the study of old maps,
especially old Viking maps of North America and Greenland . He took the map
home, and returned it with some very surprising comments. He made the statement
that , in his opinion , the southernmost part of the map represented bays and islands
of the Antarctic coast of Queen Maud Land now concealed under the Antarctic ice
cap. That would imply, he thought , that somebody had mapped this coast before
the ice had appeared.
       This statement was too radical to be taken seriously by most professional
geographers, though Walters himself felt that Mallery might be right . Mallery
called in others to examine his findings. These included the Reverend Daniel L.
Linehan, S.J ., director of the Weston Observatory of Boston College, who had
been to Antarctica, and the Reverend Francis Heyden , S.J ., director of the George-
town University Observatory. These trained scientists felt confidence in Mallery.
Father Linehan and Walters took part with Mallery in a radio panel discussion ,
sponsored by Georgetown University, on August 26, 1956. Verbatim copies of this
broadcast were distributed and brought to my attention . I was impressed by the
confidence placed in Mallery by men like Walters, Linehan , and Heyden , and ,
when I met Mallery himself , I was convinced of his sincerity and honesty. I had a

     4
         See correspondence, Note 2 .
     5
         For a translation of all the legends on the map, see Note 3.
                                               THE TREASURE HUNT BEGINS 3
strong hunch that , despite the improbabilities of his general theories, and the lack ,
then, of positive proof , Mallery could well be right. I decided to investigate the
map as thoroughly as I could . 1 therefore initiated an investigation at Keene State
College.
     This investigation was undertaken in connection with my classes at the college,
and the students from the beginning took a very important part in it .6 It has been
my habit to try to interest them in problems on the frontiers of knowledge, for
1 believe that unsolved problems provide a better stimulation for their intelligence
and imagination than do already-solved problems taken from textbooks. 1 have
also long felt that the amateur has a much more important role in science than
is usually recognized . I teach the history of science, and have become aware of
the extent to which most radical discoveries (sometimes called “ breakthroughs” )
have been opposed by the experts in the affected fields. It is a fact , obviously, that
every scientist is an amateur to start with . Copernicus, Newton, Darwin were all
amateurs when they made their principal discoveries. Through the course of long
years of work they became specialists in the fields which they created . However ,
the specialist who starts out by learning what everybody else has done before
him is not likely to initiate anything very new. An expert is a man who knows
everything, or nearly everything, and usually thinks he knows everything important ,
in his field . If he doesn ’ t think he knows everything, at least he knows that other
people know less, and thinks that amateurs know nothing. And so he has an
unwise contempt for amateurs, despite the fact that it is to amateurs that innumer -
able important discoveries in all fields of science have been due.7 For these reasons
I did not hesitate to present the problem of the Piri Re’is Map to my students.




     6
      See Acknowledgments.
     7
      The late James H . Campbell , who worked in his youth with Thomas A .
Edison , said that once , when a difficult problem was being discussed , Edison said
it was too difficult for any specialist . It would be necessary, he said , to wait for some
amateur to solve it.
  c
  CHAP
  TER II
   THE
SECRETS ®
 OF THE I
        ti
PIRI RE'IS
\ MAP   m!
                      When our investigation started my students and I were ama-
                 teurs together. My only advantage over them was that I had had
                 more experience in scientific investigations; their advantage over
                 me was that they knew even less and therefore had no biases to
                 overcome.
                                                           —                    —
                     At the very beginning I had an idea a bias, if you like that
                might have doomed our voyage of discovery before it began. If
                this map was a copy of some very ancient map that had somehow
                survived in Constantinople to fall into the hands of the Turks, as
                I believed , then there ought to be very little in common between
                this map and the maps that circulated in Europe in the Middle
                Ages. I could not see how this map could be both an ancient map
                (recopied ) and a medieval one. Therefore, when one of my stu-
                dents said this map resembled the navigation charts of the Middle
                Ages, at first I was not much interested. Fortunately for me, I
                kept my opinions to myself , and encouraged the students to begin
                the investigation along that line.
                     We soon accumulated considerable information about me-
                dieval maps. We were not concerned with the land maps, which
                were exceedingly crude. (See Figures 1 and 2.) We were inter -
                ested only in the sea charts used by medieval sailors from about
                 the 14th Century on .1 These “ portolan ” 2 maps were of the Medi-
                terranean and Black Seas, and they were good . An example is the
                Dulcert Portolano of 1339. ( Fig. 3.) If the reader will compare
                the pattern of lines on this chart with that on the Piri Rc’is Map
                ( Frontispiece) he will see that they are similar . The only difference
                is that, while the Dulcert Portolano covers only the Mediterranean
and the Black Seas, the Piri Re’is Map deals with the shores of the entire Atlantic
Ocean . The lines differ from those on modern maps. The lines do not resemble

    1
       Maps in this book, except where it is otherwise indicated , are taken from the
Vatican Atlas (139) or that of Nordenskiold (146).
     2
       The term “ portolan ” or “ portolano” apparently derived from the purpose of
the sea charts, which was to guide navigators from port to port.
Figure 1. The S. Osma Beatus Medieval World Map.
Figure 2. The Andreas Walsperger Map of 1448.
                                                  V   .
                                                      v
                                                      %




                                                          '
                                           ****
                                                              *m
                                                               i
Figure 3. The Dulcert Portolano of 1339.
                                    THE SECRETS       OF THE     PIRI RE IS MAP 9
the modern map’s lines of latitude and longitude that are spaced at equal inter-
vals and cross to form “grids” of different kinds. Instead , some of the lines, at least ,
on these old maps seem to radiate from centers on the map, like spokes from a
wheel . These centers seem to reproduce the pattern of the mariner’s compass, and
some of them are decorated like compasses. The radiating “spokes ” are spaced
exactly like the points of the compass, there being sixteen lines in some cases, and
thirty-two in others.
      Since the mariner’s compass first came into use in Europe about the time that
these charts were introduced , most scholars have concluded that the charts’ design
must have been intended to help medieval sailors sail by the compass. There is no
doubt that medieval navigators did use the charts to help them find compass
courses, for the method is described in a treatise written at the time (89, 179, 200) .
However, as we continued to study these medieval charts, a number of mysteries
turned up.
      We found , for example, that one of the leading scholars in the field did not
believe that the charts originated in the Middle Ages. A . E. Nordenskiold , who
compiled a great Atlas of these charts (146) and also wrote an essay on their history
(147), presented several reasons for concluding that they must have come from
ancient times. In the first place, he pointed out that the Dulcert Portolano and
all the others like it were a great deal too accurate to have been drawn by medieval
sailors. Then there was the curious fact that the successive charts showed no signs
of development. Those from the beginning of the 14 th Century are as good as
those from the 16th . It seemed as though somebody early in the 14th Century had
found an amazingly good chart which nobody was to be able to improve upon for
two hundred years. Furthermore, Nordenskiold saw evidence that only one such
model chart had been found and that all the portolanos drawn in the following
                            —                           —
centuries were only copies at one or more removes from the original . He called
 this unknown original the “normal portolano” and showed that the portolanos,
as a body, had rather slavishly been copied from this original. He said :

    The measurements at all events show : (1) that, as regards the outline of the
Mediterranean and the Black Sea , all the portolanos are almost unaltered copies
of the same original; ( 2 ) that the same scale of distance was used on all the
portolanos (147: 24).

After discussing this uniform scale that appears on all the portolanos, and the fact
that it appears to be unrelated to the units of measurement used in the Mediter-
ranean , except the Catalan ( which he had reason to believe was based on the
units used by the Carthaginians ), Nordenskiold further remarks:

     . . . It is therefore possible that the measure used in the portolanos had its
ultimate origin in the time when the Phoenicians or Carthaginians ruled over the
10   Maps of the Ancient Sea Kings




Figure 4. Nordenskiold’ s comparison of Ptolemy ’s Map of the Mediterranean
                      (top) with the Dulcert Portolano.

navigation of the western Mediterranean, or at least from the time of Marinus of
     .
Tyre . . (147:24).*
     Nordenskiold inclined , then, to assign an ancient origin to the portolanos.
But this is not all. He was quite familiar with the maps of Claudius Ptolemy which
had survived from antiquity and had been reintroduced in Europe in the 15th
Century. After comparing the two, he found that the portolanos were much better
than Ptolemy’s maps. He compared Ptolemy’s map of the Mediterranean and the
Black Seas with the Dulcert Portolano ( Fig. 4 ) and found that the superiority
of the portolano was evident.

     * Marinus of Tyre lived in the 2nd Century    . . and was the predecessor of
                                                  AD
the geographer Claudius Ptolemy.
                                  THE SECRETS       OF THE     PIRI RE IS MAP 11
      Let us stop to consider, for a moment, what this means. Ptolemy is the most
famous geographer of the ancient world. He worked in Alexandria in the 2 nd Cen -
tury A.D., in the greatest library of the ancient world . He had at his command all
the accumulated geographical information of that world. He was acquainted with
mathematics. He shows, in his great work , the Geographia (168), a modern scien -
tific mentality. Can we lightly assume that medieval sailors of the fourteenth
century , without any of this knowledge, and without modern instruments except
                         —                             —
a rudimentary compass and without mathematics could produce a more scien -
tific product ?
      Nordenskiold felt that there had been in antiquity a geographic tradition
superior to the one represented by Ptolemy. He thought that the "normal porto-
lano” must have been in use then by sailors and navigators, and he answered the
objection that there was no mention of such maps by the various classical writers
by pointing out that in the Middle Ages, when the portolan charts were in use,
they were never referred to by the Schoolmen, the academic scholars of that age.
Both in ancient and in medieval times the academic mapmaker and the practical
 navigator were apparently poles apart . ( See Figs. 5, 6, 7, 8.) Nordenskiold was forced
to leave the problem unsolved . Neither the medieval navigators nor the known
Greek geographers could have drawn them . The evidence pointed to their origin in
a culture with a higher level of technology than was attained in medieval or ancient
times.4
    All the explanations of the origins of the portolan charts were opposed by
Prince Youssouf Kamal, a modern Arab geographer, in rather violent language:

     Our incurable ignorance . . . as to the origin of the portolans or navigation
charts known by this name, will lead us only from twilight into darkness. Everything
that has been written on the history or the origin of these charts, and everything
that will be said or written hereafter can be nothing but suppositions, arguments,
hallucinations. . . . (107: 2) 6

     Prince Kamal also argued against the view that the lines on the charts were
intended to facilitate navigation by the compass :

     As for the lines that we see intersecting each other, to form lozenges, or
triangles, or squares : these same lines, I wish to say, dating from ancient Greek
times, and going back to Timosthenes, or even earlier, were probably never drawn
. . . to give . . . distances to the navigator. . . .
     The makers of portolans preserved this method , that they borrowed from the

     4
      The Arabs, famous for their scientific achievements in the Early Middle Ages ,
apparently could not have drawn them either. Their maps are less accurate than
those of Ptolemy . (See Fig. 5.)
    5
      My translation from the French.
Figure 5. The World Map of Idrisi.
Figure 6. The World Map of Ptolemy.
* 1
*                                                                      *
             - -•• • *
             »*       • •
                  »
                  X
    I   «4
                                            :
                                                 *•*
                                                   «   Mairat
                            Figure 7. The World Map of Eratosthenes.
Figure 8. The World Map of Pomponius Mela.
16   Maps of the Ancient Sea Kings




         Figure 9. The Eight - Wind System in the Portolan Charts.
Rectangular grids could be constructed with the circular or polar type of pro-
jection used in the Piri Re’is and other portolan charts. In this diagram we see
how Livengood , Estes, and Woitkowski solved the problem of the construction
of the main grid of the Piri Re’is Map ( see Fig. 12). (Redrawn by Isroe)

ancient Greeks or others, more probably and rather to facilitate the task of drawing
a map, rather than to guide the navigator with such divisions. . . . (107:15-16)

      In other words, the portolan design was an excellent design to guide a map-
maker either in constructing an original map or in copying one, because of the
design ’s geometrical character.
      Early in our investigation , three of my students, Leo Estes, Robert Woitkow-

                       —                                 —
ski, and Loren Livengood , decided to take this question the purpose of the lines
on the portolan charts as their special project . They journeyed to Hanover, New
Hampshire, to inspect the medieval charts in the Dartmouth College Library.
On their return , one of them, Loren Livengood, said he thought he knew how the
charts had been constructed .
     The problem was to find out, from the lines actually found on the charts,
whether it might be possible to construct a grid of lines of latitude and longitude
such as are found on modern maps. In other words, the problem was to see if this
portolan system could be converted to the modern one.
      Livengood’s approach was simple. Without actually realizing the importance
                                    THE SECRETS      OF THE     PIRI RE IS MAP 17
of his choice, he put himself in the position of a mapmaker rather than of a navi-
gator. That is, he saw the problem not as one of finding a harbor, but of actually
constructing a map. He had never heard of Prince Kamal, but he was adopting the
Prince’s view of the purpose of the lines. The probable procedure of the mapmaker,
Livengood speculated, was first to pick a convenient center for his map and then
determine a radius long enough to cover the area to be mapped . With this center
and radius the mapmaker would draw a circle.
     Then he would bisect his circle, again and again, until he had sixteen lines
from the center to the periphery at equal angles of 22 % °.®
     The third step would be to connect points on the perimeter to make a square,
with four different squares possible.
     The fourth step would be to choose one of the squares, and draw lines con-
necting the opposite points, thus making a map grid of lines at right angles to each
other. ( Fig. 9)
      Now, although the scholars agreed that the portolan charts had no lines of
latitude and longitude, it stood to reason that if one of the vertical lines (such as
the line through the center ) was drawn on True North , then it would be a
meridian of longitude, and any line at right angles to it would be a parallel of
latitude. Assuming that a projection similar to the famous Mercator projection,
in which all meridians and parallels are straight lines crossing at right angles,
underlay these maps (see Fig. 10), then all parallel vertical lines would be merid -
ians of longitude, and all horizontal lines would be parallels of latitude.7
      Applying this idea to the Piri Re’is Map, we could see that the mapmaker
had selected a center, which he had placed somewhere far to the east of the torn
edge of our fragment of the world map,8 and had then drawn a circle around it.
He had bisected the circle four times, drawing sixteen lines from the center to the
perimeter, at angles of 22 % °, and he had also drawn in all the four possible
squares, perhaps with the intention of using different squares for drawing grids for
different parts of the map, where it might be necessary to have different Norths.®

     6
         These angles could also be bisected, if desired , resulting in thirty-two points
on the periphery , at angles of 11 *4 ° .
     7
        See Note 4 and Note 5.
     8
        The complete map included Africa and Asia. It was, according to Piri Re’is,
a map “of the seven seas” (see Note 3 ). In addition to the loss of the eastern part ,
there was also originally a northern section , which was detached and lost . I am
indebted to Dr. Alexander Vietor, of Yale, for this observation.
      8
        Since the earth is round, and the portolan design was apparently based on a
flat projection ( that is, apparently on plane geometry ) which could not take account
of the spherical surface, the parallel meridians would deviate further and further
from True North the farther they were removed from the center of the map. The
portolan design could compensate for this, however, as we shall see in the next
chapter, by using different Norths.
18   Maps of the Ancient Sea Kings
                                  °
                                 60
                                                        /
                                                       7
                                              BRITISH
                                              ISLES W      *
                                  °
                                 55



                                  °
                                 50



                                  °
                                 45


                                                               JAN
                                  °
                                 40

                                                  1
                                                   r
                                                           M
                                 35   °
                                 30° : «.
                                 25°


                                  °
                                 20

                                 15°
                                 10°

                                  5°
                                                                   —^
                                  0°
                                                                           1
                                  5°
                                                       S O U T H
                                 10°
                                                  A T L A N T I C
                                 15°
                                                    O C E A N
                                 20   °
                                 25   °
Figure 10. A Map of the east -
ern shores of the Atlantic on
                                 30   °
the Mercator Projection.
Compare the meridian of 20'
                                 35   °
West Longitude with the
"Prime Meridian" of the Piri     40   °20
Re’is Map (Fig. 18).                                           °       °                 °
                                         °    °
                                             15   10° 5°       0   5       10  °    °
                                                                                   15   20
                                  THE SECRETS      OF THE     PIRI RE IS MAP 19
It was Estes who originally pointed out to us that the portolan design had the
potentiality of having several different Norths on the same map.
      Now the next question was : Which was the right square for us? That is, which
(if any) of the squares that could be made out of the design of the Piri Re’is Map
was correctly oriented to North , South, East, and West?
      Estes found the solution . Comparing the Piri Re’is Map with a modern map
( Figs. 10, 11, 12) he found a meridian on the modern map that seemed to coincide
                                              —
very nearly with a line on the Piri Re’is Map a line running north and south close
to the African coast, in about 20° W longitude, leaving the Cape Verde Islands
to the west, the Canaries to the east, and the Azores to the west.
       Estes suggested that this line might be our prime meridian , a line drawn on
True North. All lines parallel to this (assuming, of course, that the underlying
projection resembled in some degree the Mercator projection ) would also be
meridians of longitude; all lines at right angles would be parallels of latitude.
The meridians and parallels thus identified , provisionally, on the Piri Re’is Map,
formed a rectangular grid, as shown in Fig. 12.
      The only difference between this large rectangular grid actually found on the
Piri Re’is Map and the grids of modem maps was that the latter all carry registers
of degrees of latitude and longitude, with parallels and meridians at equal intervals,
usually five or ten degrees apart. We could convert the Piri Re’is grid into a modern
grid if we could find the precise latitudes and longitudes of its parallels and merid -
ians. This, we found , meant finding the exact latitude and longitude of each of the
five projection centers in the Atlantic Ocean , through which the lines of Piri Re’is’
grid ran.
       At the beginning of our inquiry I had noticed that these five projection centers
had been placed at equal intervals on the perimeter of a circle, though the circle
itself had been erased ( Fig. 11 ) . I had also noticed that converging lines were ex-
tended from these points to the center, beyond the eastern edge of the map. This,
it seemed to me at the time, was a geometrical construction that should be soluble
by trigonometry. I did not then know that , in the opinion of all the experts, there
was no trigonometrical foundation to the portolan charts.
       Not knowing that there was not supposed to be any mathematical basis for
the portolanos, we now made the search for it our main business. I realized from
the start that to accomplish this we would have to discover first the precise loca -
tion of the center of the map, and then the precise length of the radius of the
circle drawn by the mapmaker. I was fortunate in having a mathematician friend ,
Richard W . Strachan, at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology. He told me
 that , if we could obtain this information for him, he might be able, by trigonometry,
to find the precise positions of the five projection points in the Atlantic Ocean on
 the Piri Re’is Map, in terms of modern latitude and longitude. This would enable
 us to draw a modern grid on the map, and thus check every detail of it accurately.
Only in this way, of course, could we verify the claim of Mallery regarding the
 Antarctic sector of the map.
    20   Maps of the Ancient Sea Kings

                                                 mm


/
                                             $


                                         »
                                         /




                                   r+^
                                   L. J,




                      l
                      *

                  N




                                     r
                                     £
                                                       '
                                                           X




                                                                                o




    Figure 11. The Piri Re’is Map: the lines of the Portolan Design traced from the
                                       facsimile.
               trvt\




Figure 12. The Piri Re’is Map: the Main Grid of the Portolan Design traced
                                             .
                            from the facsimile
22   Maps of the Ancient Sea Kings
      The search for the center of the map lasted about three years. We thought
from the beginning that the lines extending from the five projection points prob-
ably met in Egypt. We used various methods to project the lines to the point
where they would meet . Our first guess for the center of the map was the city
of Alexandria . This appealed to me because Alexandria was long the center of the
science and learning of the ancient world . It seemed likely that, if they were draw-
ing a world map, the Alexandrian geographers might naturally make their own
city its center.
      However, this guess proved to be wrong. A contradiction appeared . The big
wind rose in the North Atlantic looked as if it were meant to lie on the Tropic of
Cancer . One of the lines from this center evidently was directed toward the center
of the map. But we noticed that this line was at right angles to our prime meridian .
This meant, of course, that it was a parallel of latitude. Now, the Tropic of Cancer
is at 2314 ° North Latitude, and therefore the parallel from the wind rose would
reach a center in Egypt at 23 % ° North . But Alexandria is not at that latitude
at all. It lies in 31 ° North . Therefore Alexandria could not be the center of our
circle.
      We looked at the map of ancient Egypt to find , if we could , a suitable city
on the Tropic of Cancer that might serve as a center for the map. (We were still
attached to the idea that the center of our map should be some important place,
such as a city. Later, we were emancipated from this erroneous notion .)
      Looking along the Tropic of Cancer, we found the ancient city of Svene,
lying just north of the Tropic, near the present city of Assuan , where the great
dam is being built. Now we recalled the scientific feat of Eratosthenes, the Greek
astronomer and geographer of the 3rd Century B .C., who measured the circumfer-
ence of the earth by taking account of the angle of the sun at noon as simulta -
neously observed at Alexandria and at Syene.
      We were happy to change our working theory and adopt Syene as the center
of the map. With the help of hindsight, we could now see how reasonable it was
 to place the center of the map on the Tropic, an astronomically determined line
on the surface of the earth . The poles, the tropics, and the equator can be exactly
determined by celestial observations, and they have been the bases of mapmaking
 in all times. Syene, too, was an important city, suitable for a center . A good
 “ proof ” of this center for the map was constructed by two students, Lee Spencer
 and Ruth Baraw. Only at the end of our inquiry did we find that Syenc was not ,
 after all , exactly the center.
      The matter of the radius caused us much more trouble. At first, there appeared
 to be absolutely no way of discovering its precise length . However, some of my
                                                               —
students started talking about the Papal Demarcation Line the line drawn by
 Pope Alexander VI in M93, and revised the next year, to divide the Portuguese
 from the Spanish possessions in the newly discovered regions ( Fig. 13) . On the
 Pin Re’is Map there was a line running north and south , passing through the




                                                                                        /
24 Maps of the Ancient Sea Kings
 northern wind rose and then through Brazil at a certain distance west of the
Atlantic coast . This line appeared to be identical, or nearly identical, with the Sec-
ond Demarcation Line (of 1494) , which also passed through Brazil. Piri Re’is had
mentioned the Demarcation Line on his map, and we reached the conclusion that
this line, if it was the Demarcation Line, could give us the longitude of the north -
ern wind rose and thus the length of the radius of the circle with its center at Syene.
      The Papal Demarcation Line of 1494 is supposed to have been drawn north
and south at a distance of 370 leagues west of the Cape Verde Islands. Modern
scholars have calculated that it was at 46° 307 West Longitude (140 : 369). We
 therefore assigned this longitude to the northern wind rose, and thus obtained our
first approximate guess as to the length of the radius of the circle. According to
this finding the radius was 79° in length ( 32 % plus 46 % ). This result was wrong
by 9% °, as we later discovered, but it was close enough for a starter .
      At this stage, our findings were too uncertain to justify an attempt to apply
trigonometry to the problem . Instead , we tested our results directly on an accurate
globe provided by Estes. We made our test by actually drawing a circle, with
Syene as the center, and the indicated radius, and then laying out the lines from
 the center to the perimeter, 22 % ° apart, beginning with one to the equator. The
 result seemed pretty good, and we were sure we were on the right track.
      It was lucky that we got so far before we discovered that our interpretation
of the Demarcation Line on the map was wrong. This fact was finally brought
home to us by two other students, John F. Malsbenden and George Batchelder
( Fig. 14). They had been bending over the map during one of our long night
sessions10 when suddenly Malsbenden straightened up and exclaimed indignantly
that all our work had been wasted , that the line we had picked out was not the
right one. In an inscription on his map which we had overlooked Piri Re’is had
himself indicated an entirely different line. It was the first line, the line of 1493,
and it did not go through the wind rose at all . The mistake, however, had served
its purpose. It was true enough that the line we had picked out on the Piri Re’is
Map represented neither line; nevertheless it was close enough to the position of
the Demarcation Line of 1494 to give us a first clue to the longitude.
      Another error that turned out to be very profitable was the assumption we
made, during a certain period of time, that perhaps our map was oriented not to
True North , but to Magnetic North. Later, we were to find that many, if not
most, of the portolanos were indeed oriented , very roughly, to Magnetic North.
Some writers on the subject had argued, as already mentioned , that the lines on
the portolan charts were intended only for help in finding compass directions, and
were therefore necessarily drawn on Magnetic North .11

    10
      Interest in the map was so keen that the students would come to my apart
ment in the evening, and sometimes argue until the small hours.
                                                                                     -
   11
      See the Bibliography, Nos. 89, 116, 143, 179, 199, 200, 223.
Figure 14. An argument over the Piri Re’is Map: left to right, Leo Estes, Frank
Ryan, Charles Hapgood, Clayton Dow, John Malsbenden, George Batchelder.

     In the interest of maximum precision, I wanted to find out how the question
of Magnetic North might affect the longitude of the Second Demarcation Line,
which now determined our radius . If the Demarcation Line lay at 46° BCK West
Longitude at the Cape Verde Islands , it would , with a magnetic orientation, lie
somewhat farther west at the latitude of the northern wind rose, and this would
affect the radius . We spent time trying to calculate how much farther west the
line would be . This in turn involved research to discover the amount of the com -
pass declination ( the difference between True and Magnetic North ) today in those
parts of the Atlantic, and speculation as to what might have been the amount
of the variation in the days of Piri Re’is or in ancient times . We found ourselves
in a veritable Sargasso Sea of uncertainties and frustrations .
     Fortunately, we were rescued from this dead end by still another wrong idea .
I noticed that the circle drawn with Syene as a center , and with a radius to the
intersection of the supposed Second Demarcation Line with the northern wind
rose, appeared to pass through the present location of the Magnetic Pole . We
then allowed ourselves to suppose ( nothing being impossible) that somebody in
ancient times had known the location of the Magnetic Pole and had deliberately
selected a radius that would pass through it . Shaky as this assumption might have
been , it was at least better than the Demarcation Line, since in ancient times
26   Maps of the Ancient Sea Kings
nobody could have had an idea of a line that was only drawn in 1494 A.D. The
Magnetic Pole is, however, very unsatisfactory as a working assumption because
it does not stay in one place. It is always moving, and where it may have been in
past times is anybody’s guess.
     In the middle of this I read Nordenskiold’s statement that the portolan charts
were drawn on True North , and not on Magnetic North ( 146: 17). In this Norden -
skiold was really mistaken , unless he meant that the charts had originally been
drawn on True North and then had been reoriented in a magnetic direction .
But his statement impressed us, and then I observed , looking again at the globe
with our circle drawn on it, that the circle that passed through the Magnetic Pole
also passed very close indeed to the True Pole. Now, you may be sure, we aban -
doned our magnetic theory in a hurry, and adopted the working assumption that
perhaps someone in ancient times knew the true position of the Pole, and drew
his radius from Syene on the Tropic of Cancer to the Pole. Again , hindsight came
to our support . As in the case of the Tropic of Cancer, the Pole was astronomically
determined : It was a precisely located point on the earth’s surface.
     It appeared to us that we had swum through a murky sea to a safe shore.
We had now reached a point where it would be feasible to attempt a confirmation
of the whole theory by trigonometry. We were proceeding now on the following
asumptions : ( 1) The center of the projection was at Syene, on the Tropic of
Cancer and at longitude 321/£ ° East ; ( 2) the radius of the circle was from the
Tropic to the Pole, or 66 ° in length , and ( 3) the horizontal line through the
                           ^
middle projection point on the map ( Point III ) was the true equator. By com-
parison with the African coast of the Gulf of Guinea, this line, indeed , appears
to be very close to the position of the equator. Nevertheless, this was not merely
an assumption but also guesswork. We could not know , either, that the ancient
mapmaker had precise information as to the size of the earth , which would be
necessary for correctly determining the positions of the poles and the equator.
Such assumptions could be only working assumptions, to be used for purposes
of experiment and discarded if they proved wrong. They were, however, the best
assumptions we had been able to come up with so far, and assumptions we had
 to have to work with .
     We could now give our mathematician , Strachan, the data he required for a
mathematical analysis. He calculated the positions of all the five projection centers
on the Piri Re’is Map to find their precise locations in latitude and longitude.12 He
 used our assumed equator as his base line of latitude. I have tried to explain this
 in Fig. 15. Here I have drawn the first radius from the center of the projection
 to the point of intersection of the assumed equator with the perimeter of the
circle. I then have laid out the other radii at angles of 22 *4 ° northward and south -

      For the final determinations of these positions see Figure 18 .
     12

For the calculations see Appendix.
                                 THE SECRETS      OF THE    PIRI RE IS MAP 27
ward . In this way, our assumption that this equator is precisely correct controls the
latitudes to be found for the other four projection points. The assumed equator
is the base line for latitude, just as Syene is the reference point for longitude.
      Strachan initially computed the positions of the five projection points both
by spherical and by plane trigonometry . At each successive step, with varying
assumptions as to the radius of the projection and the position of its center, he
did the same thing, but in every case the calculations by plane trigonometry made




               Figure 15 . A diagram of the hypothetical Piri Re ’ is
                       projection , as based on the equator.


     —
sense that is, plane trigonometry made it possible to construct grids that fitted
the geography reasonably well, while the calculations by spherical trigonometry
led to impossible contradictions. It became quite clear that our projection had
been constructed by plane trigonometry.13
     Once we had precise latitudes and longitudes for the five centers on the Piri
Re’is map, we could construct a modern type of grid . The total difference of
latitude between Point I and Point V, divided by the millimeters that lay between
them on our copy of the map ( we used a tracing of our photograph of the map),
gave us the length of the degree of latitude in millimeters. To check on any pos-
sible irregularities we measured the length of the degree of latitude separately

    18
         See Note 6 for a comparison of the results in one case.
28 Maps of the Ancient Sea Kings
                                     G
                                 PT . Ii 53.2° N
                                        I   32.9° W


                         26.8°

                                 7.5°
                                         PT . H
                         1H »           ,
                                   26 4° N
                                   39 i 4° W


                         264°

                                 4.0°

                                            PT. m
                                            00 0° N
                                            35.4° W

                         23.1°

                                                              23 1° S
                                                    PT . E7   21.5° W


                                        I
                                              13.9 ° •
                                                  16.3°
                                                          4,        22.1°

                                                      i                   PT . Y
                                                                        —° o
                                                                        39.4 S>
                                                                               ~


                                                                         0.6° E
              Figure 16 . Mode of calculating the length of the de-
                           gree for the Piri Re’is Map.

between each two of the five points. We followed the same procedure with the
longitude, as illustrated in Fig. 16. The lengths of the degrees of latitude and
longitude turned out to be practically the same; we thus appeared to have a square
grid . In doing this we disregarded the scales actually drawn on the map, since there
was no way of knowing when or by whom they had been drawn, or what units of
distance they had represented .
      The next step was to learn how to draw a grid , not at all an easy task. It was
not a particularly complicated task, but it demanded a very high level of accuracy
and an extreme degree of patience. Fortunately, one of my students, Frank Ryan ,
was qualified for the job. He had served in the Air Force, had been stationed at
Westover Air Force Base in Massachusetts, and had been assigned to the Carto        -
graphic Section of the 8th Reconnaissance Technical Squadron, under a remark        -
able officer, Captain Lorenzo W. Burroughs. The function of the unit at that time
was to prepare maps for the use of the United States Air Force’s Strategic Air
                                 THE SECRETS       OF THE    PIRI RE IS MAP        29
Command, known as SAC. Later, it was attached to the 8th Air Force. Needless
to say, the personnel of that unit were competent to serve the demanding require-
ments of the Air Force, as far as mapmaking was concerned , and Frank Ryan had
been intensively trained in the necessary techniques. He had had the experience
of being drafted into the Air Force: now he had the experience of being drafted
again , to draw our grid .
      Later Ryan introduced me to Captain Burroughs, and I visited Westover Air
Force Base. The captain offered us his fullest cooperation in preparing a draft
map with the solution of the projection , and virtually put his staff at our disposal .
The co-operation between us lasted more than two years, and a number of officers
and men gave us very valuable assistance.14 Later both Captain Burroughs and
his commanding officer , Colonel Harold Z. Ohlmeyer reviewed and endorsed our
work ( Note 23).
      The procedure for drawing the grid was as follows: All the meridians were
drawn parallel with the prime meridian, at intervals of five degrees, and all par-
allels were drawn parallel with the assumed equator, at intervals of five degrees.
These lines did not turn out in all cases to be precisely parallel with the other
lines of the big grid traced from the Piri Rc’is Map, but this was understandable.
The effect might have resulted from warping of the map, or from carelessness in
copying the lines from the ancient source map Piri Re’is used . We had to allow
for a margin of error here, for we could not be sure that no small errors had crept
in when the equator or the prime meridian was recopied . Here, as in other respects,
we simply had to do the best we could with what we had .15
      When the grid was drawn, we were ready to test it. We identified all the
places we could on the map and made a table comparing their latitudes and longi -
tudes on the Piri Re’is Map with their positions on the modern map. The errors
in individual positions were noted and averages of them made ( Table 1 ). The
Table is, of course, the test of our solution of the Piri Re’is projection .
      But I must not get ahead of my story. We found that some of the positions
 on the Piri Re’is Map were very accurate, and some were far off . Gradually we
became aware of the reasons for some of the inaccuracies in the map. We dis-
covered that the map was a composite, made up by piecing together many maps
of local areas (perhaps drawn at different times by different people), and that
errors had been made in combining the original maps. There was nothing extraor-
dinary about this. It would have been an enormous task , requiring large amounts
of money, to survey and map all at once the vast area covered by the Piri Re’is
Map. Undoubtedly local maps had been made first, and these were gradually com-
bined, at different times, into larger and larger maps, until finally a world map
was attempted . This long process of combining the local maps, so far as the sur-

    14
         See Acknowledgments.
    15
         See also Strachan’s discussion, Note 8.
30 Maps of the Ancient Sea Kings
viving section of the Piri Re’is Map is concerned, had been finished in ancient
times. This theory will , I believe, be established by what follows. What Piri Re’is

                                   —
probably themselves combinations to make his world map.
                                                                      —
apparently did was to combine this compilation with still other maps which were

     The students were responsible for discovering many of the errors. Lee Spencer
and Ruth Baraw examined the east coast of South America with great care and
found that the compiler had actually omitted about 900 miles of that coastline.
It was discovered that the Amazon River had been drawn twice on the map. We
concluded that the compiler must have had two different source maps of the
Amazon , drawn by different people at different times, and that he made the mis    -
take of thinking they were two different rivers. We also found that besides the
equator upon which we had based our projection (so far as latitude was con         -
cerned ) there was evidence that somebody had calculated the position of the
equator differently, so that there were really two equators. Ultimately we were
able to explain this conflict. Other important errors included the omission of part
of the northern coast of South America , and the duplication of a part of that
coast, and of part of the coasts of the Caribbean Sea . A number of geographical
localities thus appear twice on the map, but they do not appear on the same
projection . For most of the Caribbean area the direction of North is nearly at right
angles to the North of the main part of the map.
      As we identified more and more places on our grid , and averaged their errors
in position, we found all over the map some common errors that indicated some-
 thing was wrong with the projection . We concluded that there must still be
errors either in the location of the center of the map, in the length of the radius,
or both . There was no way to discover these probable errors except by trying out
all reasonable alternatives by a process of trial and error. This was time consuming
and a tax on the patience of all of us. With every change in the assumed center
of the map, or in the assumed radius, Strachan had to repeat the calculations, and
once more determine the positions of the five projection points. Then the grid
 had to be redrawn and all the tables done over. As each grid in turn revealed some
 further unidentified error, new assumptions had to be adopted , to an accom-
 paniment of sighs and groans. We had the satisfaction , however, of noting a
gradual diminution of the errors that suggested that we were approaching our goal.
      Among the various alternatives to Syene as the center of the map we tried
out, at one stage, the ancient city of Berenice on the Red Sea . This was the great
shipping port for Egypt in the Alexandrian Age, and it, too, lay on the Tropic of
 Cancer. Berenice seemed to be a very logical center for the map because of its
 maritime importance. We studied the history of Berenice, and everything seemed
 to point to this place as our final solution . But then , as in an Agatha Christie
 murder mystery, the favorite suspect was proved innocent . The tables showed the
 assumption to be wrong, for in this case the errors were even increased . We had
                                 THE SECRETS       OF THE    PIRI RE IS MAP 31
to give up Berenice, with special regrets on my part because of the beauty of the
name.
     Now we went back to Syene, but with a difference. The tables showed that
the remaining error in the location of the center of the map was small. Therefore
we tried out centers near Syene, north , east, south and west, gradually diminishing
the distances, until at last we used the point at the intersection of the meridian of
Alexandria , at 30° East Longitude, with the Tropic. This finally turned out to
be correct.
     Immediately hindsight began to make disagreeable comments. Why hadn’t
we thought of this before? Why hadn’t we tumbled to this truth in the beginning?
It combined all the most reasonable elements: the use of the Tropic, based on
astronomy, and the use of the meridian of Alexandria , the capital of ancient
science. Later we were to find that all the Greek geographers based their maps on
the meridian of Alexandria .
     Remaining errors in the tables suggested something wrong with the radius.
We knew, of course, that our assumption that the mapmaker had precise knowl-
edge of the size of the earth was doubtful . It was much more likely that he had
made some sort of mistake. We therefore tried various lengths. We shortened the
radius a few degrees, on the assumption that the mapmaker might have under            -
estimated the size of the earth, as Ptolemy had . This only increased the errors.
Then we tried lengthening the radius. The entire process of trial and error was
repeated with radii 7°, 5°, 2 °, and 1 ° too long. Finally we got our best results with
a radius extended three degrees . This meant that our radius was not 66.5°, the
correct number of degrees from the Tropic to the Pole, but 69.5°. This error
amounted to an error of 414 Pcr cent in overestimating the size of the earth .
     A matter of great importance, which we did not realize at all at the time,
was that we were, in fact, finding the length of the radius (and therefore the length
of the degree) with reference mainly to longitude. I paid much more attention
to the average errors of longitude than I did to the errors of latitude. I was
especially interested in the longitudes along the African and South American
coasts. Our radius was selected to reduce longitude errors to a minimum while
not unduly increasing latitude errors. As it turned out, this emphasis on longitude
was very fortunate, for it was to lead us to a later discovery of considerable
importance.
     With regard to the overestimating of the circumference of the earth , there
was one geographer in ancient times who made an overestimate of about this
amount . This was Eratosthenes. Does this mean that Eratosthenes himself may
have been our mapmaker? Probably not. We have seen that the Piri Re’is Map
was based on a source map originally drawn with plane trigonometry. Trigonom -
etry may not have been known in Greece in the time of Eratosthenes. It has been
supposed that it was invented by Hipparchus, who lived about a century later.
32    Maps of the Ancient Sea Kings
Hipparchus discovered the precession of the equinoxes, invented or at least de-
scribed mathematical map projections, and is generally supposed to have developed
both plane and spherical trigonometry ( 58:49; 175 :86).10 He accepted Eratosthenes’
estimate of the size of the earth (184: 415) though he criticized Eratosthenes for not
using mathematics in drawing his maps.
     We must interfere in this dispute between Hipparchus and Eratosthenes to
raise an interesting point . Did Hipparchus criticize his predecessor for not using
mathematically constructed projections on which to place his geographical data ?
If so, his criticism looks unreasonable. The construction of such projections re-
quires trigonometry. If Hipparchus himself developed trigonometry, how could
he have blamed Eratosthenes for not using it a century before? Hipparchus’ own
books have been lost, and we really have no way of knowing whether the later
writers who attributed trigonometry to Hipparchus were correct . Perhaps all they
meant , or all he meant or said in his works, was that he had discovered trigonom    -
etry. He might have discovered it in the ancient Chaldean books whose star data
made it possible for him to discover the precession of the equinoxes.
     But this is speculation , and I have a feeling that it is very much beside the
point. If Hipparchus did in fact develop both plane and spherical trigonometry,
the Piri Re’is Map, and the other maps to be considered in this book , are evidence
suggesting that he only rediscovered what had been very well known thousands
of years earlier . Many of these maps must have been composed long before Hip-
parchus. But it is not possible to see how they could have been drawn as accu        -
rately as they were unless trigonometry was used. (See Note 7.)
     We have additional confirmation that the Piri Re’is projection was based on
Eratosthenes’ estimate of the size of the earth . The Greeks had a measure of
length , which they called the stadium . Greek writers, therefore, give distances in
stadia . Our problem has been that they never defined this measure of length.
We have no definite idea , therefore, of what the stadium was in terms of feet or
meters. Estimates have varied from about 350 feet to over 600. Further, we have
no reason to even suppose that the stadium had a standard length . It may have
differed in different Greek states and also from century to century.
     A great authority on the history of science, the late Dr. George Sarton of
Harvard , devoted much attention to trying to estimate the length of the stadium
used by Eratosthenes himself at Alexandria in the 3rd Century B .C . He concluded
that the “ Eratosthenian stadium ” amounted to 559 feet (184 : 105).lT
     The solution of the Piri Re’is projection has enabled us to check this.

     18
        However, a knowledge of plane trigonometry has been attributed to Appo-
lonius, an earlier Greek scientist, by Van der Waerden ( 216). The date of its
origin appears, then, unknown.
     17
        That is, there were about 9.45 Eratosthenian stadia to a mile of 5,280 feet,
which figures out to 558.88 feet per stadium.
                                 THE SECRETS      OF THE     PIRI REIS MAP 33
Presumably, it proves the amount of the overestimate of the earth’s circumference
to be 4 y2 per cent (or very nearly that ) . Eratosthenes gave the circumference of the
earth as 252,000 stadia . We checked the length of his stadium by taking the true
mean circumference of the earth ( 24,800 miles ) , increasing this by 4 % per cent,
turning the product into feet, and dividing the result by 252,000. We got a stadium
547 feet long.
      Now, if we compare our result with that of Sarton , we see that there is a
                                                               —
difference of only 12 feet, or about 2 per cent . It would seem again by hindsight
that we could have saved all our trouble by merely adopting Eratosthenes’ circum-
                                                                                    —
ference and Sarton’s stadium . We could then have drawn a grid so nearly like
the one we have that the naked eye could not have detected the difference.
      The next stage, which came very late, was our realization that if Eratosthenes’
estimate of the circumference of the earth was used for drawing Piri Re’is’ source
map, and if it was 4 *4 per cent off , then the positions we had found by trigonometry
for the five projection points on the map were somewhat in error both in latitude
and longitude. It was now necessary to redraw the whole grid to correct it for the
error of Eratosthenes. We found that this resulted in reducing all the longitude
errors until they nearly vanished.
      This was a startling development. It could only mean that the Greek geogra -
phers of Alexandria , when they prepared their world map using the circumference
of Eratosthenes, had in front of them source maps that had been drawn without
the Eratosthenian error , that is, apparently without any discernible error at all.
We shall see further evidence of this, evidence suggesting that the people who
 originated the maps possessed a more advanced science than that of the Greeks.
      But now another perplexing problem appeared . The reduction of the longi-
tude errors left latitude errors that averaged considerably larger. Since accurate
longitude is much more difficult to find than accurate latitude, this was not reason-
able. There had to be some further undetected error in our projection.
      We started looking for this error, and we found one. That is, we found an
error . It was not quite the right one; it did not solve our problem , but it helped
us on the way. As already mentioned , we had found the positions of the five pro-
 jection points by laying out a line first from the center of the projection to the
 intersection of the circle with the line on the Piri Re’is map running horizontally
through the middle projection point , Point III, assuming this to be the equator.
We had used this assumed equator as our base line for latitude. (See Fig. 15.)
      When we laid out the projection in this way, we had not yet realized that
 the mapmaker was much more likely to have drawn his first radius from the center
of the map directly to the pole and not to the equator. (See Fig. 17.) If he did this,
since his length for the degree was wrong, then his equator must be off a number
of degrees. This required new calculations, and still another grid .
      At first, this new grid seemed to make matters worse, especially on the coast
of Africa . The equator seemed to pass too near the Guinea coast by approximately
34     Maps of the Ancient Sea Kings

                                                       •North Pole


                                                        m
                                                        cn
                  I                                    ID
                                              22 V20
                                         22 '/2°
                                     ^
                  Tropic of Cancer
( 23 V2 N)   n                                          23.5° N
                                                        30.0° E
                                     22 /l
                                             ?\

                                              22' /2
     ( i° N)     nr


             ( 2 lV2°S ) E


                                      Y
                 Figure 17. A diagram of the hypothetical Piri Re’ is projection
                                 as based on the North Pole.

five degrees. My heart sank when this result became apparent, but I am thankful
that I persisted in redrawing the grid despite the apparent increase in the errors,
for the result was a discovery of the very greatest importance.
     At first I thought that the African coast (and that of Europe) had simply
been wrongly placed too far south on the projection . But I soon saw that if the
African coast appeared too far south on the corrected projection , the French coast
was in more correct latitude than before. There was simply, I first concluded , an
error in scale. Piri Re’is, or the ancient mapmaker , had used too large a scale for
Europe and Africa . But why, in that case, though latitudes w'ere thrown out, did
longitudes remain correct?
     I finally decided to construct an empirical scale for the whole coast from the
Gulf of Guinea to Brest to see how accurate the latitudes were relative to one
another. The result showed that the latitude errors along the coasts were minor.
It was obvious that the original mapmakers had observed their latitudes extremely
well. From this it became apparent that those who had originally drawn this map
of these coasts had used a different length for the degree of latitude than for the
degree of longitude. In other words, the geographers who designed the square
                                 THE SECRETS      OF THE     PIRI RE IS MAP 35
portolan grid for which we had discovered the trigonometric solution , had ap-
parently applied their projection to maps that had originally been drawn with
another projection.
      What kind of projection was it? Obviously it was one that took account of
the fact that, northward and southward from the equator, the degree of longitude
in fact diminished in length as the meridians drew closer toward the poles. It is
possible to represent this by curving the meridians, and we see this done on many
modern maps. It is also possible to represent this by keeping the meridians straight
and spacing the parallels of latitude farther and farther apart as the distance from
the equator increases. The essential point is to maintain the ratio between the
lengths of the degrees of latitude and longitude at every point on the earth’s
surface.
      Geographers will, of course, instantly recognize the projection I have de-
scribed here. It is the Mercator projection , supposedly invented by Gerard Mer-
cator and used by him in his Atlas of 1569 ( Note 5). For a time we considered the
possibility that this projection might have been invented in ancient times, for -
gotten, and then rediscovered in the 16th Century by Mercator ( Note 15). Further
investigation showed that the device of spreading the parallels was found on other
maps, which will be discussed below.
      I was very reluctant to accept without further proof the suggestion that the
Mercator projection ( in the full meaning of that term ) had been known in ancient
times. I considered the possibility that the difference in the length of the degree
of latitude on the Piri Re’is Map might be arbitrary . That is, I thought it possible
that the mapmaker, aware of the curvature of the earth , but unable to take account
of it as is done in the Mercator projection by spherical trigonometry, had simply
adopted a mean length for the degree of latitude, and applied this length over the
whole map without changing the length progressively with each degree from the
equator.
      Strangely enough , shortly after this, I found that , according to Nordenskiold ,
 this is precisely what Ptolemy had done on his maps (see Note 9) . In Norden -
skiold ’s comparison of the maps of the Mediterranean and Black Sea regions as
 drawn by Ptolemy and as shown on the Dulcert Portolano ( Fig. 4), we see that
 he has drawn the lines of Ptolemy’s projection in this way. This is, of course,
another indication of the ancient origin of Piri Re’is’ source map.
      This is not quite the end of the story. We shall see, in subsequent considera -
 tion of the De Canerio Map of 1502, that the oblong grid , used by Ptolemy and
 found on the Piri Re’is Map, has its origin in an ancient use of spherical trigo-
 nometry.
      These successive discoveries finally enabled us to draw a modern grid for most
of the Piri Re’is map, as shown in Figure 18.
                                                                 THE PIRI REIS MAP OF 1513
                                                  IN ALL THE WORLD THERE IS NO OTHER MAP LIKE THIS MAP- PIRI RE ’ IS
                                                                                                                                        N
                                                                                                                                                f
                                                                                                                               l            /
                                                                                                 %         51.4° N
                                                                                                  Z /T\ 36.9° W
                                                                                                                                                     tf                    20
Here the Prime Meridian of                                                                                                                                                                                       - 45° N
Grid B. the equator of Grid
B, and a Meridian of the                                                                                                                                      18
mam Grid intersect .                                                                                                  GRID A
                                                                                                                                                              17
                                                                                                                                                                                     14                          —   40° N
                                                                                                                                                              16               14
                                                                                                                                                                                             TT                  - 35° N
                                                                                                                                                     23
                                                                                              Heavy lines represent Piri Reis
                                                                                              grid traced from photograph of
                                                                                              the original
                                                                                                                                   —                                   •C
                                                                                                                                                                                     “                           -   30° N
                                                                                                                                                         12
                                                                                                                                                                   '
                                                                                                                                                                       '                     v
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 - 25° N
                                                                                                  23.5° N
                                                                                                  42.6° W                                       11
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     20° N
                                                                Omission of coast ine
                                                                ( A ) loss of 4.5 longitude
                                                                going West                                                                      9
                                                                                                                                                    10
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 —   15° N
                                                                                                                                                     8
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     10° N
                                                                                                                                   2                 7 ^%
                                                                                                                                   —
                                                                                                                                                                  -Vi ^9 :
                                                                                                                                   2                                                                 V
                                                                                                                                   m                          6                              2       i
                                                                                                                                   73                              ••                                i
                                                                                                       9                                                                   5        4^
                                                                                                                                   o                                                                                 5° N
                                                                                                             0°                    >                                                     3
                                                                                                                                                                                                         l
                      EQUATOR OF ORIGINAL '   1
                                                                                                                                   z                                                                     i
                   TRIGONOMETRIC PROJECTIO                                                                                                                                                               l
                                                                                                             4.4° S
                                                                                                            36.9° W                             PIRI REIS     EQUATOR
                                 0°
                                                                                                     ©                                                                                                               0°
                    The Grids
                                                                                                        c
                                                                                                                  0°
                                                                                                                                                                                             1J
                                                                                                                                                                                                 *           \
                                                                                                                                                                                                             I
                                                                                                                                                                                                             J
        The longitudes of Grid A are de -
        termined by the trigonometric pro -                                                            46                                                                                                            5° S
             jecuon oaseu on me poie trig. i / j          .                                                                                                                                                            l
            The latitudes, however, have been                  oS                                                                                                                                                     S
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      /
            modified, ( a ) by a shift of the whole         a4          ’                                                 49                                                                                          i
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               10° S
            geography of both sides of the Atlantic                                                    92
            about 4.4 ® northward, apparently on the
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       s
            assumption that the horizontal line through
                                                                             4*                                                                                                                                            .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                           V
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               I
             Point III of the portolan design was supposed                                                                                             15 S
                                                                                    _o b                    90b                                                                                                            i
            to be the equator; and (b) by the apparently
            arbitrary increase In the distance between the
            parallels, a device to take account of the curva            -
                                                                                •P&* -   o <>
                                                                                                                                                       20° S
                                                                                                                                                                              27.8° S
                                                                                                                                                                              21.3° W
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               )
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               i
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               \

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               15° S
            ture of the earth that has been attributed to                                        <=>                                                                                                                               i
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   x
                                    .
            Ptolemy ( Note 9) These changes were no doubt the                                                                                                                                                                       V 20° S
            work of later geographers           .                                                                                                                                                                              l
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   /
               The northward shift of the geography of the main                                                                                                                                                                    \
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   s
            grid had the effect of pushing the geography of Grid B                                                             gjpk   Omission of coastline ( B): Cape                                                                     N
            westward about 4 °, thus increasing the longitude errors                                                               Frio to Bahia Blanca = loss of                                                                          I
            of that part of the map.
                                                                                                              71               6<P 16 of latitude and 20 of longi
                                                                                                                                                                                        ~
                                                                                                                                                                                            Figures m brackets represent ** \25 S
               Grid B is determined both as to latitude and longi -                                                                   tude. going southward                                 latitude adjusted for omissions \
                                                                                                                                                                                            of part of the South American
            tude by the trigonometry of the projection based on                                                Py <* 72                                                                     Coast and of Drake Passage (a
                        .
            the pole It may be considered as a part of the main                                                                                                                             total of 25 )
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   - 30°S [55° SJ
            grid that has been swung through an arc of about                                                   73
£           78 % degrees. Both the prime meridian and the equator                                                       # 75                                                                                                       43.1° S
                                                                                                                  * « « *<k
o
            of Grid B can be considered extensions of the lines of
                                                                                                                                                                                            88                                      2.2° E
m                                                                                                              L               7                                                                                                               1
            Grid A .                                                                                                4
               For a list of the numbered geographical points, see                                                                                                                                                                     -       35° S [60° s]
            below. For a list of the numbered geographical points
            with comparative tables of their latitudes and longi-                                                  0
                                                                                                                                      **77      79
                                                                                                                                                               t
                  .
            tudes see Table 1           .
              Grids C and D represent errors in compilation, Grid                               Omission (C). Drake Passage: = Loss of 9                                                                                               *       40JS [65° SJ
            C having an error in scale, and Grid D being unrelated                              more of latitude going southward                                                                 81
            to the trigonometric projection.
                                                                                                                                                                                80
                                                                                                                                                                                   *
                                                                                                                                                                                  *s                                                       86
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   A
                                                                                                                                                                                            83
                                                                                                                                            i                                                                                              45° S [70° S]
    95° W       90° W       85° W       80° W   75° W   70° W   65° W       60° W        55° W         50° W        45° W          40° W   35° W       30° W       25° W   20° W I5» w 84
     1. Annobon Islands                     .
                                        21 Cape Verde Islands                   34. Essequibo River                                             53. Island of Marajo                               .
                                                                                                                                                                                                 73 Bahia Grande
      .
     2 Cavally River                    22. The Canary Islands                       .
                                                                                35 Orinoco River                                                54. Essequibo River                                .
                                                                                                                                                                                                 74 Cape San Diego (near the Horn)
     3. Cape Palmas                     23. Madeira Islands                     36. Gulf of Venezuela                                              .
                                                                                                                                                55 Mouths of the Orinoco                         75. Falkland Islands
            .
     4. St Paul River                   24. The Azores                               . .
                                                                                37 Pt Gallinas                                                  56. Peninsula of Paria                           76. The South Shetlands
      .
     5 Mano River                           .
                                        25 Cuba                                 38. Magdalena River                                             57. Martinique                                     .
                                                                                                                                                                                                 77 South Georgia
     6. Freetown                             (a) Gulf of Guacanayabo                 .
                                                                                39 Gulf of Uraba                                                58. Guadaloupe                                   78. The Palmer Peninsula
      .
     7 Bijagos Islands                       (b) Guantanamo Bay                 40. Honduras (Cape Gracias a Dios)                              59. Antigua                                      79. The Weddell Sea
     8. Gambia River                         (c) Bahia de Nipe                       .
                                                                                41 Yucatan                                                      60. Leeward Islands                              80. Mt. Ropke . Oueen Maud Land
     9. Dakar                                (d) Bahia de la Gloria                  .
                                                                                42 Cape Frio                                                    61. Virgin Islands                                 .
                                                                                                                                                                                                 81 The Regula Range
    10. Senegal River                        (e) Camaguey Mountains             43. Salvador                                                       .
                                                                                                                                              62 Gulf of Venezuela                               82. Muhlig-Hofmann Mountains
    11. Cape Blanc                           (f) Sierra Maestra Mountains       44. San Francisco River                                       63. Magdalena River                                83. Penck Trough
      .
    12 Cape Juby                        26. Andros Island                            .
                                                                                45 Recife (Pernambuco)                                        64. Atrato River                                   84. Neumeyer Escarpment
      .
    13 Sebu River                           .
                                        27 San Salvador (Watling)               46. Cape Sao Rocque                                           65. Honduras (Cape Gracias a Dios)                 85. Drygalski Mountains
    14. Gibraltar                       28. Isle of Pines                            .
                                                                                47 Rio Parahyba                                               66. Yucatan                                        86. Vorposten Peak
    15. Guadalquivir River              29. Jamaica                             48. Bahia Sao Marcos                                          67. Bahia Blanca                                   87. Boreas, Passat Nunataks
                   .
    16. Cape St Vincent                 30. Hispaniola                          49. Serras de Gurupi, de Desordam,                            68. Rio Colorado                                   88. Tristan d’Acunha
      .
    17 Tagus River                           (Santo Domingo, Haiti)                  de Negro                                                 69. Gulf of San Mathias                            89. Gough Island
    18. Cape Finisterre                     .
                                        31 Puerto Rico                          50. The Amazon (No. 1) Para River
                                                                                     .                              .
                                                                                                                                                   .
                                                                                                                                              70 Rio Negro (Argentina)                            .
                                                                                                                                                                                                 77 South Georgia
      .
    19 Gironde River                        .
                                        32 Rio Moroni                           51 The Amazon (No 2) Para River                                    .
                                                                                                                                              71 Rio Chubua                                      95. Fernando da Naronha
    20. Brest                           33. Corantijn River                          .
                                                                                52 The Amazon (No 2) western        .                              .
                                                                                                                                              72 Gulf of San Gorge
                                                                                     mouth
                                                                                                            Figure 18
   o
  CHAP
 TER III
  THE
PIRI RE'IS <§>.
  MAP
    IN
 DETAIL
                      In undertaking a detailed examination of the Piri Re’is Map
                of 1513, I shall break down the map into sections representing
                originally separate source maps of smaller areas, which appear to
                have been combined in a general map by the Greek geographers
                 of the School of Alexandria.1
                      With regard to each of the source maps, which I shall refer
                to as “component maps,” since they are the parts of the whole,
                 I will identify such geographical points as are evident in them-
                selves, or are rendered plausible by their position on the trigono-
                 metric grid, and will find their errors of location .
                     Since in some cases the component maps were not correctly
                placed on the general map, we have two sorts of errors: those due
                to mistakes in compilation of the local maps into the general map
                and those due to mistakes in the original component maps. These
                can be distinguished because if a component map is misplaced,
                all the features of that map will be misplaced in the same direc-
                tion and by the same amount. If the general error is discovered
                and corrected, then the remaining errors will be errors of the
                original local maps. We have discovered that in most cases the
                errors on the Piri Re’is Map are due to mistakes in the compilation
                of the world map, presumably in Alexandrian times, since it ap-
                pears, as we shall see, that Piri Re’is could not have put them
                together at all . The component maps, coming from a far greater
antiquity, were far more accurate. The Piri Re’is Map appears, therefore, to be
evidence of a decline of science from remote antiquity to classical times.

       .
      1 The western coasts of Africa and Europe, from Cape Palmas to
      Brest, including the North Atlantic islands (Cape Verdes, Canaries,
         Azores, and Madeira ) and some islands of the South Atlantic.
    Longitudes, as well as latitudes, along the coasts are seen to be remarkably
accurate (see Table 1). The accuracy extends also to the North Atlantic island
groups as a whole, with an exception in the case of Madeira .

    11 do not wish to exclude the possibility, however, that another reasonable ex-
planation for the source of the compilation may some day be forthcoming.
40    Maps of the Ancient Sea Kings
     The accuracy of longitude along the coast of Africa , where it is greatest, might
be attributed simply to our assumptions as to the center and radius of the pro-
jection , but for two considerations. First, the assumption regarding the length of
the radius ( that is, the length of the degree) was not reached with reference to
the coast of Africa , but with reference to the width of the Atlantic and the longi-
tude of the coast of South America. It will be seen from our map ( Fig. 18) and
from Table 1 that both these coasts, separated by the width of the Atlantic, are in
approximately correct relative longitude with reference to the center of the pro-
jection on the meridian of Alexandria . This seems to mean that the original map-
maker must have found correct relative longitude across Africa and across the
Atlantic from the meridian of Alexandria to Brazil.
      It is also important that most of the islands are in equally correct longitude.
The picture that seems to emerge, therefore, is one of a scientific achievement far
beyond the capacities of the navigators and mapmakers of the Renaissance, of
any period of the Middle Ages, of the Arab geographers, or of the known geogra -
phers of ancient times. It appears to demonstrate the survival of a cartographic
tradition that could hardly have come to us except through some such people as
the Phoenicians or the Minoans, the great sea peoples who long preceded the
Greeks but passed down to them their maritime lore.
      The accuracy of placement of the islands suggests that they may have been
found on the ancient source map used by Piri Re’is. The "discoveries ” and map-
ping of these islands by the Arabs and Portuguese in the 15th Century may not,
then , have been genuine discoveries. It is possible that the 15th Century sailors
really found these islands as the result of accidental circumstances ( being blown
off course, etc.) . On the other hand , nothing excludes the possibility that source
maps used by Piri Re’is, dating from ancient times, were known in some form
to people in Europe. Possibly some of the early voyages to some of these islands,
particularly the Azores, were undertaken to confirm the accuracy of the old maps.
It is hardly, if at all, possible that these 15th Century navigators could have found
correct longitude for the islands. All they had to go by were rough guesses of
courses run , based on the direction and force of the wind , and the estimated
speed of their ships. Such estimates were apt to be thrown off by the action of
ocean currents and by lateral drift when the ship was trying to make to windward .
      A good description of the problem of finding position at sea is given by a
16th Century writer quoted by Admiral Morison in his Admiral of the Ocean Sea:
     “O how God in His omnipotence can have placed this subtle and so important
art of navigation in wits so dull and hands so clumsy as those of these pilots! And
to see them inquire, one of the other, ‘ how many degrees hath your honor found ?’
One says ‘sixteen,’ another ‘a scant twenty’ and another ‘thirteen and a half .’
Presently they ask, ‘How doth your honor find himself with respect to the land ?’
One says, ‘ I find myself forty leagues from land,’ another ‘I say 150,’ another
says ‘ I find myself this morning 92 leagues away.’ And be it three or three hundred
nobody agrees with anybody else, or with the truth .” ( 140: 321-322)
                                      THE PIRI RE IS MAP        IN   DETAIL 41
     In the days of Piri Re’is no instruments existed by which the navigator at sea
could find his longitude. Such an instrument did not appear for another 250 years,
when the chronometer was developed in the reign of George III . It does not seem
possible to explain the accuracy of longitude on the Piri Re’is Map in terms of
navigational science in the time of Piri Re’is.
    The case for latitude is somewhat different . Latitude could be determined in
the 15th and 16th Centuries by astronomical observations. However, observations
taken by trained people with proper equipment were one thing, and observations
taken by explorers were quite another . Morison says that Columbus made serious
mistakes in finding latitude. Speaking of the First Voyage he says : . . We have
only three latitudes (all wrong) and no longitude for the entire voyage” (140:157).
He describes one of Columbus’ attempts to find his latitude as follows :
     On the night of Nov. 2 (1492) two days before the full moon , he endeavored
to establish his position by taking the altitude of the North Star with his wooden
quadrant . After applying the slight correction he decided that Puerto Gibara ,
actually in Lat . 21 ° 06' N , was in 42 ° N, the Latitude of Cape Cod (140 : 258).

     For a long time after the four voyages of Columbus we find the latitudes of
Cuba and Haiti wrong on the maps of the time. Almost all mapmakers put the
islands above rather than below the Tropic of Cancer.2
     To return to the problem of longitude, Morison remarks that the only method
of finding longitude known in the 16 th Century was by the timing of eclipses, but
that nobody was successful in applying it. He says :
     The only known method of ascertaining longitude in Columbus’ day was by
timing an eclipse. Regiomontanus’s Ephemerides and Zacuto’s Almanack Per-
petuum gave the predicted hours of total eclipse at Nuremberg and Salamanca
respectively, and if you compared those with the observed hour of the eclipse,
wherever you were, and multiplied by 15 to convert time into arc ( 1 hour of time =
15 ° of Longitude) there was your longitude west of the Almanach maker’s me-
ridian . Sounds simple enough , but Columbus, with two opportunities ( 1494 and
1503) muffed both , as did almost everyone else for a century. (140:185-186)
     Morison describes in an interesting manner the failure of an attempt to find
the longitude of Mexico City in 1541 ( twenty-eight years after Piri Re’is drew his
map) :
    At Mexico City in 1541 a mighty effort was made by the intelligentsia to de-
termine the longitude of the place by timing two eclipses of the moon . The im -

    2
     Among such maps I may list the Juan de la Cosa Map of 1500 ( Fig. 19), the
Cantino Map of 1502, the so-called Bartholomew Columbus Map of 1503 ( Fig. 22),
the Waldseemuller Maps of 1507 and 1516, the Ruysch Map of 1508 ( Fig. 24),
the Robert Thorne Map of 1527 ( Fig. 20) and the Miguel Vilanovano Map of 1535.
There are many others .
42 Maps of the Ancient Sea Kings
posing result was 8h 2 m 32s ( = 120° 38' west of Toledo) but the correct difference
of longitude between the two places is 95° 12', so the Mexican savants made an
error of 251/4 °, or M 50 miles! Even in the 18th Century Pere La bat, the earliest
writer ( to my knowledge ) who gives the position of Hispaniola correctly, adds this
caveat : “ I only report the longitude to warn the reader that nothing is more un -
certain , and that no method used up to the present to find longitude has produced
anything fixed and certain ” (140:186).

     With this backwardness of the 16th Century science of navigation, I cannot
see how the accuracy of the Piri Re’is Map can be explained , either as to latitude
or longitude.* Figures 19-24 illustrate the poor qualities of the maps that were
drawn at this time.
     With regard to latitude there are several complications in the Piri Re’is Map.

         — —
Its history that is, the history of the source map used by him for the Atlantic
coasts must have been a long one, for several different stages of mapmaking are
reflected in it.
     We thought at first that the horizontal line running through Point III repre-
sented the equator of the projection . This would involve a design as in Fig. 16,
with the line from the center to the point of intersection of this horizontal line
with the perimeter of the circle as the determining line; in reference to this line
all the other radii were laid out at angles of 22 V2 ° to the north and south . Our
results indicate that something like this was done; that is, that the source map
we are discussing (embracing Africa, Europe, and some of the islands ) was at
some time during the history of the map placed on the projection in this way.
It might have been done visually, or empirically, so to speak , simply by placing the
African coast of Guinea at the correct distance north of this central line, which
was taken for the equator. This was an error, with reference to the mathematical
projection , the equator of which in fact lies nearly five degrees north of this line,
as shown in Fig. 17.
      We concluded that an error was made here because some of the Piri Re’is
Map ( to be discussed below ) in fact is in line with the equator of the trigonometric
projection . It seems probable that we are dealing here with the work of different
people who redrew the map at different times with different ideas. The large
wind roses in the North and South Atlantic Oceans, apparently identifying the
Tropics, may have been superimposed on the map by the geographers who made
 the error in placing their source map. Figure 17 shows that according to the trigo-
nometric projection the northern projection point lies on the Tropic of Cancer ,

     3
       W. H. Lewis, in his “The Splendid Century” ( Doubleday, 1957, pp. 227-228),
quotes an extract from the memoirs of the Abbe de Choisy (1644-1724) on the
difficulty of finding longitude a century and a half after Piri Re’is: “Father Fontenay
lectures on navigation , and shows that not only is longitude undiscovered, but why
                     .
it is undiscoverable. .
                                                                       )
                                                                    •.•••
                                                                            -x
                                                                                                           _— —r
                                                                                      ar:
                                                                                        - •j i *
                                                                                                                                                l
                                                                                      —
                                                                                      *X
                                                                                       t
                                                                                           w
                                                                                                   *
                                                                                                   2
                                                                                                       •    •
                                                                                                            •
                                                                                                            :
                                                                                                            <
                                                                                                            *
                                                                                                                CD'. - 'i P?
                                                                                                                 ” **: ;
                                                                                                                 . : s»: r cx
                                                                                                                 t       %
                                                                                                                             ri
                                                                                                                                       </*
                                                                                                                                       *x
                                                                                                                                                ir
                                                                                 rs        r.  f                     *   > <            $
                                                                                                                     Mi
                                                                                                                                  J
                                                                                 Jr
                                                                                                                 ^ :'->
                                                                                            ir
                                                                                           rr2-
                                                                                 v\                                  •
                                                                                 mm
                                                                                               *
                                                                                               *
                                                                                                           Sj{2; «
                                                                                                                     Ini
                                                                                                                                      IM*i »   MJ
                                                                                                                                               E
                                                                                                                     e
i
                                  <TWWv
                                                .
                                          la # fp « uola
                                                                                                                     c
. . Iit.
            0 o
             o                                                                                                       ft
             .
                                          1
                                               ,7 S .' '                                                                                                                                 -~
                                     tert®M..
    *»      C rnJ # C»itrri                         *      L                                                                                                                     tu
                                                                                                                     ©
     C
        >
        -                                                      rc                                                                                                            •
                                                                                                                                                                                 f§
                                                                                                                                                                                      ^»* •*«»•
                                                                                                                                                                                                  /
                                                                                                                                                                                       -A
     J
 I                                                                                                                                                                                                ^
ii                        o:                                                                                         00                 •
                                                                                                                                        f»
                                                                                                                                                       -<rf•
                                                                                                                                                     »•*       f
                                                                                                                                                                     -
                          0
                                                                                                                                        r*«T
                                                                                                                                                "*
                                                                                                                                                               (
                                                                                                                                                               »   .Ut..Mk
            o                                                                                                        o
                                                                                                                     CO
            •P0 /
                   ^                                                                                                                                           v   , n *S W
                                                                                                                                                                         ^
                                                                                                                                                                                           y//
                                                                                                                                                                                                      %
                                                                                                                     s
                              ?              Figure 19. The Juan de la Cosa Map of 1500                                           .
              .
     Rad in 180 demercationis Pomtga’.eofnj a terns ifto 0 oppofitis inripiunt *ac termirutur in p.radus \6o.
^- Jbuiuscartxvcrfusoitemcm,fccudurocompounonemHi
                                                 .
                                                             ( panorura . Ei fic inlulx Thar fit 4: Oihr
                                                                                                         dmtfi.
                                                                                                                  T*His is tSe forme of a Mappe fent i t i J . from Siuill in Spaync by raairtcr Robert Thorne
tnz vidcmur extra lUorumderocTcationcmcadere Portugalcnrrs veto (us mrleuanonem a terns lOofigno >L
     .
                       .
oppolmsincipeTf aiuot Jc term mareingradus 180. huius carry, vt videamiirrryd '&as inUiias vim j aitio
                                                                                                  ^
gete Sc grad us i8o.demercacionts Hilpanorutn a pciorc figno ® lecundum Hifpjooium copulationrm Vcl
                                                                                                           ^                    .                                                 -
                                                                                                                  * marchaunr toDodor Ley EinbailadourforkitgHenry the 8 »o Charles the Exnperour
                                                                                                                    > nd although the fame in this prdentnme may letme rude , yet I haue Crt il out , be
                                                                                                                                                                                                            .
                                                                                                                                                                                                             -
                                                                                                  .
ineipramapofteriorclecundum Portugal enfcs verbs occiden:em, 3£ ternunantur in gradvis ido (ccundum                 caulehtsbookecouldenoi well be vnderftood wuhour the fame. The imperfefiioo of
         .        .                             .                                  .
Hilpanos vd iSo lecundum Porjugolcnfes Eifir licrt mlulzThariis Sc Ophit vider tur atiinhere Porrugaleo-
IrsjumentniulcCapoveTJeda&Zt uxinzra (upradidafigna 0 »1          I< cadunrtvidf ( uromiue: e. Etfk <ium to.
                                                                                                                    which Mappe may be excufed by that rymerthc knowledge of Cofaographic ooc then be
                                                                                                                               yng eotred among our Marchaumcs , as oowc it is   .                           -
                                   ^
luLu Capomdc retinae voluw Poctugalcslcs , IIUJ Thirds fie Odu oon poflunr auiognc              .
                                                                    Figure 20. The Robert Thorne Map of 1527.
Figure 21. The Benedetto Bordone Map of 1528.
3
                                 *n
                                     ^ rjo u ^ , j                           .
                                                                                 -   »fvH
                                            ^
                                                Cc\ r              c' ''' Z -0 *<C.sr^ '
                                                                                     L
                                                                                                                                              ’C -i
                             \         1
                             K ^ bl' iapl
                                                                   l
                                                                    -     K* ^
                                                                                      *
                                                                                         yri
                                                                                 $** d* l«p<                ’   *-   CANCfr )                     ^K o r
                   \
                             n rm <\                    .
                                                                                                                         *9&   .    C tyorx J
                                                                                                                                    •t    v
                                                                                                                                               ,, /;
                                                                                                                                              ^v
                                                                                                                                     ftp*; # rf   ^
                                                                                                                                              **1 sr*s\
    ;- fArnc* J >' vt
               *
                        />yf
                             -* p- <ic
                             N             Con /tiei
                                                    ^
                                                                                                    yrsi
                                                                                                \ do\ ct'
                                                                                                           -rdrOjitO-.


                                                                                                                         %
                                                                                                                          ^     s       r
                                                                                                                                          *
                                                                                                                                         J.
    Uj        *-         1
                                                                                                                                    l         SjHtrtJcfr   j >’
                                                                                                                                                              .
    ircn- ffi                                                  Moivt> o           M o          vo
                   ^vv
                             -   •
                                                Figure 22. The “ Bartholomew Columbus” Map.
Figure 23. The Rolemaeus Basilae Map of 1540.
48               Maps of the Ancient Sea Kings




             v »0 -
    “*  •      '".
             TUT
          •MK.
T
     ^
    •.
    »|V
             iA IK


             * H i'




             £ rV
          /**\ / / * r*                                                              **
                                                                                          1




                                                                     .
                                                                                     i
                                                                             *
. W'
                                                                                 '
                                                        fAV» *       Sr/*                     O   '
         71 : « *                 o
                                      •    J
                                           r        *                    v   •"P
|1 /  o*                      <
                                          9*
                                                r
                                                         vUi>             o*'%
   T;

    •
    i
         A
                 *.
                 *
                     r
                              *T /
                                  »       JT
                                               2
                                                -
                                               r'        HVt     '       •iM *
I   o        *                                               »16^

                      a
                 *f       «                                  tv  *   •


h; i
i
                                  »*
                                    ? 9
             *        m
                                  A                              »*M»


                                                         I



                                                             I
                                      Figure 24 . The Joannes Ruysch Map of America of 1508.

    Note , Figures 19-24: This selection of maps drawn in the Age of Discovery
    illustrates the weaknesses of the cartographic science of the period. So far as
    relative distances, land shapes , and particularly longitude are concerned these
    maps are much inferior to the Piri Re’ is Map. None of these maps suggests the
    use of trigonometry.
                                        THE PIRI RE IS MAP         IN   DETAIL 49
while the southern one does not coincide closely with the Tropic of Capricorn ;
the altered projection shows the northern projection point several degrees off the
Tropic of Cancer while the southern projection point lies fairly close to the Tropic
of Capricorn. The geometry of the projection makes it impossible for both pro-
jection points to coincide with the respective Tropics by either arrangement . It
may be noted, however, that whoever converted the latitude from the trigono-
metric projection to make the equator coincide with the central projection point
on the perimeter of the circle did not alter the longitudes of the coasts, which are
close to correct by either system . We may conclude that the whole source map
embracing Europe and Africa was simply shoved due North about five degrees.
This would have produced some minor errors in longitude, but of too small a scale
to be noticeable to us. Piri Re’is himself may have made the change.
     Some of the islands included on this component map may have been added
by Piri Re’is on the basis of accounts of recent explorations. Those islands which
appear to be seriously misplaced in latitude or longitude may have been such addi-
tions. On the other hand , it may be the case with some (as perhaps with Madeira
and Fernando da Naronha ) that their errors in latitude may be due to having been
ignored when the component map was shifted northward .
     All things considered , I am inclined to believe that Piri Re’is himself shifted
the component map northward to make it agree with his view that the line through
the central projection point ( Point III ) must represent the equator. If he did this,
it indicates a good knowledge on his part of the latitudes of the Guinea coast . As
we shall see, this knowledge was available as the result of the Portuguese explora -
tion of that coast in the 15th Century . This exploration resulted in some careful
scientific observations of latitude such as were not available from accounts of the
American explorations.
     To sum up, then , this part of the Piri Re’is Map suggests that Piri Re’is had
a source map of Africa , Europe, and the Atlantic islands, based on maps probably
drawn originally on some sort of trigonometric projection adjusted to the curvature
of the earth . By default of any alternative, we seem forced to ascribe the origin
                                                  —
of this part of the map to a pre- Hellenic people not to Renaissance or Medieval
cartographers, and not to the Arabs, who were just as badly off as everybody else
with respect to longitude, and not to the Greeks either. The trigonometry of the
projection (or rather its information on the size of the earth ) suggests the work of
Alexandrian geographers, but the evident knowledge of longitude implies a people
unknown to us, a nation of seafarers, with instruments for finding longitude un -
dreamed of by the Greeks, and , so far as we know, not possessed by the Phoeni-
cians, either.
50   Maps of the Ancient Sea Kings

      2. A special projection in the Caribbean, including part of the coast
                                of South America.

     The Caribbean part of the Piri Re’is Map offered us the greatest difficulties.
It seemed entirely out of line. The coast appeared to trend the wrong way. It looked
at first like some of the very worst mapmaking imaginable. From our studies of
the portolan projection , however, I was prepared to accept the possibility of there
being more than one North on this map. Estes had pointed out that the portolan
design permitted a change of North from one part of a map to another, if and
when it became desirable to move from one square, or grid , to one of the others
that the design made possible.
      I was looking at the map one day when I suddenly found that by twisting my
head to one side, I could make some sense of the Caribbean section . I saw that
there was indeed another North in this area . I assumed to start with that it might
be integrated with the mathematics of the world projection . It had already become
evident to us that it was theoretically possible to take any one of the map’s projec-
tion points, whose positions were now known , and repeat the portolan design by
drawing a circle with this point as a center , and then constructing a grid within it
exactly as with the world projection . This would be a satellite grid, and any North
line could be chosen to suit the mapmaker’s convenience.
     To solve this problem it was necessary to locate a North line, that is, a prime
meridian . By identifying on the map a number of geographical localities which lay
at the same latitude on the modern map of the Caribbean, I drew a rough parallel.
                 —            —
I then looked for and found a line on the Piri Re’is projection at right angles to
this. The line I found came down from Projection Point I at the top of the map
and bisected what looked like the Peninsula of Yucatan . The angle of this line to
the meridians of the main part of the map was 78% °; this meant that it lacked
one compass point (1134 ° ) of being at a right angle to the north of the rest of the
map.
     Gradually it became possible to extend the mathematical system of the whole
projection to this part of the map. The common point was Projection Point I,
which we had located at 51.4° North Latitude and 36.9° West Longitude. We
assumed this point to be at the same latitude in both parts of the map. Since the
length of the degree was ( by assumption ) the same, we could lay out parallels of
latitude at five-degree intervals down to zero, which was, then , the equator of this
special projection . Latitude was thus integrated mathematically with the world
projection .
      We found , after a number of tests, that the Ptolemaic spacing of parallels had
also been applied in this component map.
     The longitude problem presented much greater difficulty . Our first solutions
were largely guesswork. Finally, the problem was solved by dropping a line, from
                                        THE PIRI RE IS MAP          IN   DETAIL 51
the intersection of the prime meridian of our Caribbean section with the equator
of that section , to the bottom of the map, where it intersected the register of
longitude of the main grid extended westward. The longitude of the point of
intersection at the bottom of the map became the longitude of our local prime
meridian, and thus both the latitudes and longitudes of the Caribbean section
were determined (See Fig . 18).
      Now, if the reader will visualize the entire Caribbean grid as suspended from
Point I, hanging down with no place to put its feet , and then swung through an
arc of 78 % °, he should get the idea . Since the swing of the projection is so exact ,
and since, as the tables show (Table 1 ), the latitudes and longitudes of the identi-
fiable places around the Caribbean are remarkably accurate, we are sure that the
accuracy of this special projection is not a coincidence.
      Perhaps the reader may wonder at the mapmaker’s reason for resorting to this
                                                 —                        —
device. The only answer I am able to suggest and it is only a guess is that he
may have had ancient maps ( maps ancient then ) of the Caribbean area , with ample
notations of latitude and longitude, but drawn , like a modern map, on some sort
of spherical projection . Perhaps because he was unfamiliar with spherical trigo-
nometry, he may have been forced to treat the round surface of the earth as a
series of flat planes. He therefore had to have different norths in areas that were
too far removed from each other in longitude. He was clever enough to work out
a scheme by which he could preserve the accuracy of latitude and longitude in the
Caribbean . He had to find just the right angle for North that would achieve this
purpose, and he did so. But it is probable that he did not achieve the full accuracy
of his ancient sources.
     Strong support for this hypothesis is provided by a comparison of the Piri Re’is
Map with a modern map of the world drawn on a polar equidistant projection
 (see Figs. 25, 26, 27). This map was drawn for the use of the Air Force during
World War II. It was centered at Cairo, Egypt , because an important U .S. air base
was located there. Since Cairo is not far from the center of the Piri Re’is world
projection, this modern map gives us a good idea of what the world would look
like on a projection of this kind centered on Egypt. If we look at Cuba on this
equidistant map, we notice that it appears to run at right angles to a latitude line
drawn through Cairo. In other words, if we regard the map as representing a flat
surface, then Cuba runs north and south , just as it seems to run with reference to
the main projection of the Piri Re’is Map. Furthermore, in both cases we see
Cuba much too far north .
      How is this to be explained ? What else can we conclude but that the map-
maker, confronted by a spherical projection he did not understand, had to translate
his geographical data (latitudes and longitudes of places in the Caribbean ) into
terms of a flat surface? This contains the implication , of course, that spherical
trigonometry must have been known ages before its supposed invention by Hip-
parchus in the second century B.C. It also raises another question : How did it
52 Maps of the Ancient Sea Kings




Figure 25. Map of the world on an Equidistant Projection, based on Cairo,
                    Egypt. (United States Air Force)
                                                                                                     /    c

                                                                                                    compari -
                                                                                     . (Section for

Figure 26. Map of
                                                                           ^       l513J




                                                                                     \
                              22                       \
                                                           \

                                                               \
                     3
                     <
                                      <0                                   I
                                           I                   A
                                                                           I
                                                                   \

      Jr
       .
       ft                                                                  i

                                                                       C
                 2                                                             1
                              N                I
                                                                               1
                                               I
                         3’                                                    I
                                               I                               I
                                               l
                                  4

                                                   5

                                                                     Projection
                                          imposed on the Equidistant
                               Projection
     Figure   27. The Pin Reis      of the world.
54       Maps of the Ancient Sea Kings
happen that a world map, apparently drawn ages before Hipparchus, was centered
on Egypt? Can we ascribe such advanced knowledge to the early Egyptians? If not,
to whom ? I do not apologize for raising such thorny questions. They are at present
unanswerable. Perhaps they will be answered some day.
     To sum up, then, our mapmaker was faced with the problem of indicating
True North both for the Atlantic and for the Caribbean area, which extends
much farther west . Since the portolan projection is a rectangular projection and
the earth is round, it is evident that you cannot extend it through many degrees
of longitude without getting to a place where the meridians will not point north
at all. The geometrical scheme of the portolan projection, with several possible
Norths, was the only way to solve this problem . But there had to be mathematical
calculations. Only by trigonometry could the correct angle for the Caribbean prime
meridian be found.
     The peculiar projection for the Caribbean area permits some conclusions as
to the probable history of the map as a whole. In the first place it is clear that
Piri Re’is could not have constructed this part of his world map. Such a thing as
two Norths on the same map was unheard of in the Renaissance. To Piri Re’is,
the idea of changing the direction of north in the middle of the ocean would be
lunacy, and all the mapmakers of the age would have looked at the matter the
same way. But even if he had the idea , even if he knew some trigonometry (of
which there is no evidence) 4 he still could not have drawn the map, because neither
he nor, as far as is known , anyone else at that time had any information as to the
longitudes of places in the Caribbean .
     What applies to Piri Re’is applies also to Columbus. Columbus could not
have drawn any part of the map included in the special grid because for him, as
for Piri Re’is, there could be only one North on a map. It is possible, however , that
this special grid may provide a solution to one of the problems of Columbus’ first
voyage.
     Let us suppose that Columbus had a copy of this map of the Caribbean , as it
appears on the Piri Re’is Map. ( Piri Re’is himself believed this was the case.)
Perhaps the map showed the Azores, or even some part of the European coast,
so that by simple measurement Columbus was able to get an idea of the scale of
the map and the distance across the ocean to the Caribbean islands .
     We know he had some sort of map and that he had an idea of how soon he
would find land . But we also know that he did not find land where he had expected

     4
       Fortunately we possess, in Piri Re’is’ extensive treatise on the geography of
the Mediterranean , the “ Kitabe Bahriye” (145a ), a large number of maps personally
drawn by him. Their characteristics are most interesting. Like Arab maps generally,
they are good pictures. But they lack any sort of projection. They do not even carry
scales of distance. They do not show the compass directions of the portolan charts.
See Figs. 28-33.
                            THE PIRI RE IS MAP        IN   DETAIL 55




                     V




Figure 28. The Piri Re ’ is Map of Corsica (from the Bahriye).




            Figure 29. A modern map of Corsica.
56   Maps of the Ancient Sea Kings



                                                   r.v'.




        Figure 30 . The Piri Re ’ is Map of Crete ( from the Bahriye) .




                   Figure 31. A modern map of Crete.
                                      THE PIRI RE IS MAP       IN   DETAIL 57




Figure 32. The Piri Re ' is Map of the western Mediterranean and Gibraltar (from
                                   the Bahriye).




           Figure 33. A modern map of the western Mediterranean.
58 Maps of the Ancient Sea Kings
to find it. Instead , he had to sail about one thousand miles farther and was faced
with a threatened mutiny of his crew. Finally he made a landfall at the island of
San Salvador (Watling Island ) or some other island nearby.
     Now, if you look at San Salvador on our map ( Fig. 39) and note its longitude
on the main grid of the map, you will see that it lies just west of the 60 th meridian
on that grid instead of at 74 % ° West Longitude where it actually should be. But
if you swing the map around and find the longitude of the island on the special
Caribbean grid , it turns out to be at 80.5° West. The trouble that Columbus ran
into may now be understood . His error in not understanding the map he had may
have led to a mistake of about 14° or about 840 miles in his estimate of the
distance across the Atlantic, and thus nearly caused the failure of his expedition .
     Let us consider the probabilities of Columbus’ having carried with him from
Spain a copy of this component map of the Caribbean . He need not have had with
him the entire source map used by Piri Re’is, including South America . The
evidence is that he did not suspect that a continent lay to the south of the
Caribbean until he ran into the fresh water of the Orinoco out at sea .
     We have seen that Piri Re’is, in all probability, had ancient maps at his
disposal in Constantinople. It is quite possible that copies of some of these had
reached the West long before his day. Greek scholars fleeing from the Turks




Figure 34 . Martin Behaim ' s Map of the mouth of the St . Lawrence, drawn in
1492 before the return of Columbus from his first voyage, as compared with
later maps, (a ) modern map, ( b) Sebastian Cabot , 1544 , (c) Behaim Globe,
1492 , (d) Lescarbot map of 1606. After Hjalmar R . Holand , in ‘‘ Explorations
in America Before Columbus," New York , Twayne, 1956.
                                            THE PIRI RE IS MAP               IN    DETAIL 59

                                                                      HIBERNIA
                                                                      BRAZIL A     '
                                              0 c e a n u s\
                                              -             -
                                                                 AZORES
                                              0rientaIis
                                              41 n d i a e \
                                              -


                                                                              MADEIRA



                                              — - Tropicus Cancer \   V\ \
                                                                         ~
                                                                                  \ CANARDS
                                                                                                   1


                                                  LU
                                                                                   .  \ \
                                                                                       ,    C
                                                                                           VERDE
                                                                                                       SIERRA
                                                                                                       LEONE




                                                                                                       -L
                                                                                                30

                            UANA\   \   |
                             \UU
                   Figure 35 . The Toscanelli Map of 1474 .

brought thousands of Greek manuscripts to Italy before the fall of Constantinople
in 1453. Much earlier still, in the year 1204, a Venetian fleet , supposedly intended
to carry a crusade to the Holy Land , attacked and captured Constantinople. For
about sixty years afterward Italian merchants had access to map collections in
Constantinople.
     We have reason to believe that good maps of the St . Lawrence River were
available in Europe before Columbus sailed in 1492. In Fig. 34 we see a map of
the river and the islands near its mouth that the mapmaker Martin Behaim placed
on a globe he made and completed before Columbus returned from his first voyage.
Columbus was not an ignorant mariner, as some people seem to imagine. He was
quite at home in Latin , which indicated some education, and he was a cartographer
by trade. It is known that he traveled widely in Europe, always on the lookout for
maps. His voyage was not a sudden inspiration ; it was a deeply settled objective,
one followed with perseverance for many years, and it required, above all , maps.
The historian Las Casas said that Columbus had a world map, which he showed
to King Ferdinand and Queen Isabella , and which, apparently, convinced them
that they should back Columbus.
     Many have thought that this map may have been the map said to have been
sent to Columbus by the Italian scholar Toscanelli (see Fig. 35). But a Soviet
scientist has presented a strong argument against this, including evidence that the
Toscanelli letter to Columbus, accompanying the map, was a forgery ( 209). In
any case, the Toscanelli Map, whether Columbus had it or not, is a very poor map.
                                                                      SAN
                                                                      SALVADOR

                                                                       CAT I.



  °
20 N                                                     s:            LONG I


                                                                  CROOKED I .
                                                                                .


                                                           Bahia de
                                                              Nipe
                                                              1                 %



15 ° N


                                            1
                                                                                    %

                                  1   Golfo dc
                                 Guacanayabo                                                             HAITI




                           *
                                                    Guantanamo
                ISLE OF
                  PINES
10° N


                                                  *
                                                 JAMAICA




           85° W                80° w                    75° W                          70° w                      65° W
              Figure 36. Cuba according to the Piri Re’is Map.


                                                         ""



                                                            ^
                                                                   ABACO
                                          BAHAMA I   .
26°N
                                                                     » ELEUTHERA I      .




                                                   *
                                           ANDROS
                                             I.                                         .
                                                                                        I
                                                                                            SAN SALVADOR
24° N                                                                                       B
                                                                         \
                                                                            LONGS
                                                                                CROOKED . )
                                                                                                         MAYAGUANA
                                                                                   I    .
                                                                                                                   CAICOS
                                                                                                             .       I.
            ISLE OF
             PINES
                                                 Golfo
                                                                                Bahia de
                                                                                    Nipe           ^
                                                                                                    ,/
                                                                                                        ^  GT
                                                                                                         ^INAGUA
                                                                                                             I.

20° N                                        GuacanayabOg|
                                                                              Guantanamo
                                                                                      I LE DE LA
                         GR.                                                           GONAVE
                       CAYMAN

18° N

   84° W           82° W         80° W             78° W               76° W                    74° W             72°W

           Figure 37. A modern map of Cuba and the adjacent islands.
                                         THE PIRI RE IS MAP         IN   DETAIL 61
      Cuba on the Piri Re’is Map presents some very interesting problems.
       In the first place, Cuba was wrongly labeled Espaniola ( Hispaniola , the island
now comprising Haiti and the Dominican Republic) by Piri Re’is. This error was
accepted by Philip Kahle who studied the map in the 1930’s (106). Nothing could
better illustrate how ignorant Piri Re’is was of his own map. The mislabeling of
Cuba also clearly shows that all he did was to get some information verbally from
a sailor captured by his uncle, or from some other source, and then try to fit the
information to a map already in his possession, a map he may have found in the
Turkish Naval Archives, which possibly inherited it from the Byzantine Empire.
In Figures 36, 37 I have compared the island 1 have identified on the Piri Re’is
Map as Cuba with a modern map of that island .
       This comparison shows that what we have in this island on the Piri Re’is Map
is a map of Cuba, but a map only of its eastern half . We can identify a number
of points around the coasts and in the interior . The western half is missing, but,
as if to compensate for this, the island is shown at twice the scale of the rest of
the map, so that it subtends about the correct amount of longitude for the whole
island . Oddly enough , there is a complete western shoreline where the island is cut
off , as if , when the map was drawn , all of western Cuba was still beneath sea level .
We observe that some islands are shown in the west in the area now occupied by
western Cuba .
       There is good evidence that a map of a thus truncated Cuba was well known
in Europe before the first voyage of Columbus. In Figure 38 I have compared the
Cuba of the Piri Re’is Map with the island labeled “Cipango” on the Behaim
Globe (completed before Columbus’ return from his first voyage), on the Toscanelli
Map, and on the Bordone Map of 1528.
                              b




Figure 38. The Piri Re’is version of Cuba (c) as compared with versions of the
            island of ‘ ‘Cipango.” (Behaim Globe , a , Bordone , b)
     Figure 39. The Piri Re ’is World Map of 1528 (surviving fragment).


     It seems quite clear that Bordone’s island , which of the three most closely
resembles the Piri Re’is island, was not inspired by the current information on
Cuba . Cuba on the maps made by the 16th Century explorers in no way resembles
the island on the Piri Re’is Map. (See, for example, Fig. 39, the Piri Re’is Map
of 1528. Here Piri Re’is represents Cuba in a form typical of the other maps of
the day. He had evidently abandoned his ancient maps.)
     In view of the possibility that an ancient map of the eastern half of Cuba
may have been circulating in Europe before Columbus’ first voyage, it becomes
increasingly easy to accept the idea that Columbus may have found a good map,
                                                            THE PIRI RE IS MAP                  IN       DETAIL 63
         85             80                             75             70                        65                                   60




25                                                                                                                                        25



                             N
              I
                                 X



                  2
                  <
20                                                                                                                                        20




     0
                                                             o>

                                                                  c
                                                                                   C
                                                                                            =
                                                                                            >        •
                                                                                                     >

                                                                                                     0
                                                                                                       i0   0

                                                                                                            •o o
                                                                                                                *
                                                                                                                0


                                                                                                                    o
                                                                                                                        c
                                                                                                                        P



                                                                                                                            0             15
                                                                                                                                ft
                                                                                                                                o




                                               /
                                                   i
                                                   >
                                                       I
                                                                       "
                                                                           —-
                                                                           \
                                                                           \
                                                                               I
                                                                               s
                                                                                   '/
                                                                                        v
                                                                                                                            0



                                                                                                                                          10
                                             *
                                             *
                                         *
                                     (
                                     v
                      Figure 40. The coasts Columbus visited (solid lines).


         at least the Caribbean section of the Piri Re’is Map, and that this may actually
         have led him to America. In view of these facts one of my students, Lee Spencer,
         revised the old verse:
                                 In Fourteen Hundred Ninety Two
                                Columbus sailed the ocean blue.
                                 With maps in hand drawn long before
                                 He headed straight for Cuba’s shore.
                                 Much fame he gained, so I am told,
                                 For he proved true the maps of old.
             The Piri Re’is representation of Cuba suggests that the Caribbean section of
         his map was itself a compilation of originally separate local maps. One of these
         may be identified in the map of Hispaniola .
              Here we have still another North . The arrow on our map indicates the direc-
         tion of north for Hispaniola and some adjacent islands. It does not agree with
64    Maps of the Ancient Sea Kings
the Norths either of the main grid or of the Caribbean grid; it is not, so far as we
can see, integrated with the trigonometric projection . Columbus could not have
placed it on the map (assuming he had it ) because, if there was one thing Columbus
could determine, it was north, and he would therefore have aligned Hispaniola
with the rest of the Caribbean islands on the main grid of the map.

      3. A map of the Atlantic coast of South America, from Cape Frio
              northward to the Amazon, with an error in scale.

      On the Piri Re’is Map, South America consists of a compilation of various
local maps differing in scale and in orientation . This particular component map
is on too small a scale, as shown by the inset grid, Fig . 18, but is in correct longitude.
It is possible that we can partially reconstruct the story of this map.
      It was, in the first place, an accurate map of the coast. But it seems that the
mapmaker may have been operating under the impression that Point IV of the
world projection pattern lay on the Tropic of Capricorn , and he placed this
component map so that its southern end lay on this assumed tropic. This left its
northern end too far south , because of an error in the scale. The mapmaker,
however, may have been unaware of this because of a failure to identify the river
shown there as the Para River, one of the mouths of the Amazon . According to
my interpretation, the map does show the course of the Amazon coming down
to its Para River mouth, but it does not show the Island of Marajo. The map
would suggest that it may come from a time when the Para River was the main
or only mouth of the Amazon , and when the Island of Marajo may have been part
of the mainland on the northern side of the river. If the mapmaker knew of the
 Island of Marajo as existing in his time he might not identify the river on his
source map with the Amazon . We shall see evidence shortly that he did know
of the existence of the Island .
      The evidence for my interpretation of this part of the map is in the agreement
of the inset grid on our tracing with the topography, as shown in Table 1.

      4. A map of the Amazon and the Island of Marajo, correctly placed on
            the equator of the trigonometric projection; some other
                                   component maps.

     One part of the Piri Re’is Map that seems to date without modification from
the time when a trigonometric projection was used to compile a world map from
various local maps is a map of the Amazon with a very good representation of the
Island of Marajo. Here both mouths of the Amazon are shown . The upper one,
the mouth of the Amazon proper, is shown about 10° north of the river just
suggested as the Para River, on the inset grid of our map. It lies about 5° north
of the line used as the equator for Africa and Europe. Interestingly, both the dupli-
                                        THE PIRI RE IS MAP          IN   DETAIL 65
cations of the Amazon suggest the actual course of the river, while all the repre-
sentations of it in the later maps of the 16th Century bear no resemblance to its
real course. Moreover, the excellent representation of the Island of Marajo is quite
unique. Nothing like it can be found on any map of the 16th Century until after
the official discovery of the island in 1543. Where could Piri Re’is have got his
accurate conception of this island ? If he had somehow obtained the information
as to its shape, how could he have placed it correctly both in latitude and longi-
tude, with reference to a mathematical projection of which he was almost certainly
ignorant?
      This Island of Marajo did quite a bit of drifting after Piri Re'is’ day. It turned
up on Mercator’s 1569 Map of South America, but here we find it placed at the
mouth of the Orinoco! (See Fig. 41.)
      To the east of the South American coast the Piri Re’is Map shows a large
island where no such island now exists. One might suppose that this island was
imagined by Piri Re’is in the same way that many mythical islands were placed
on other maps of the Renaissance. Piri Re’is actually does have such an island ,
which he names “Antiilia ” ( No. 94 on our map). It looks artihcial. But the island
we have now to deal with does not have this artificial look. It has the appearance
of a real island , with harbors, and islands off the coast . Some of the photographs
show highlands around the coasts ( indicated by deeper color ) and a large central
plain .
      The fact that this island has more behind it than the imagination of one
cartographer is suggested by another map, presented to the Paris Academy of
Sciences in 1737, and associated with the name of the French geographer Philippe
 Buache, a member of the Academy. On this map we see an island, very roughly
 the shape and size of the island on the Piri Re’is Map, placed directly on the
equator! Between this island and the coast of Africa we see another island,
where none now exists. The map has indications that these islands were even then
 former , not present , islands. The coasts are hatched, suggesting approximations.
 Inside these coasts smaller islands are indicated , as if they were remnants left by
the submergence of the larger islands. Indications are given that the Cape Verde
and Canary Islands were once connected with the mainland of Africa , and other
 island groups are shown in the North Atlantic where none now exist ( Fig. 42).
      What is this map? Does it illustrate a legend of submerged islands in the
 Atlantic? If it does, then certain facts about the locations of these islands are
 relevant. One is that the big island on the Piri Re’is Map is located right over the
 Mid -Atlantic Ridge (formerly called the Dolphin Ridge ) at the spot where two
 tiny islands, the Rocks of St. Peter and Paul, jut up above the sea, just north of
 the equator and about 700 miles east of the coast of Brazil. (See Fig. 43.) Another
 fact is that the island to the east of the corresponding island on the Buache Map is
 located just over the Sierra Leone Rise, a mountain range on the ocean bottom.
 Finally, as the reader can see, a cross-section of the equatorial Atlantic, from South
                               \I .
                               \
                                        •
                                Ni ^
                                *
                                    I
                                    f. -
   " I1- 1
Figure 41. Mercator s Map of
    South America (1569).
                  Figure 42. The Buache Map of the Atlantic.


America to Africa , shows both the Mid -Atlantic Ridge and the Sierra Leone
Rise, although rather crudely.
     Many will dismiss these facts as mere coincidence. Admittedly, there is no
proof ; but I feel strongly that something more than coincidence is involved.
Figure 43 shows the present ocean bottom .
     Another component map, which may be briefly dealt with here, shows the
mountainous area on the western side of Piri Re’is’ South America . This compo-
nent map was added to the general map, but it was not integrated with the
trigonometry of the projection . There are errors both in scale and in orientation,
as shown in Figure 18.
68   Maps of the Ancient Sea Kings




             Figure 43 . Modern Bathymetric Map of the Atlantic.


     It seems at first glance that the mountains shown here must have been
intended for the Andes. However, Kahle, one of the earlier students of the map,
rejected this on the ground that the Andes were not yet discovered when Piri Re’is
drew his map. On this controversial point the following considerations may be
urged :
     First, what is the probability that a cartographer, by pure invention , would
place an enormous range of mountains on the western side of South America ,
where one actually exists?
     Second , the various rivers, including both Amazons on Piri Re’is’ map of
South America, are shown flowing from these mountains, which is correct.
     Third, the drawing of the mountains indicates that they were observed from
       —                         —
the sea from coastwise shipping and not imagined .
     Fourth, the general shape of the coast on the map agrees well with the South
American coast from about 4° South Latitude down to about 40 ° S. It is between
these latitudes that the Pacific cordillera of the Andes closely parallel the coast.
There is even a suggestion on this coast of the Peninsula of Paracas.
     Kahle adds an observation that apparently contradicts his own conclusion .
                                        THE PIRI RE IS MAP          IN   DETAIL 69
He positively identifies one of the animals shown in the high mountains as the
llama , on the ground that it shows the protruding tongue peculiar to that beast .
(106) Llamas are found in the Andes; but it is doubtful they could have been known
to anyone in Europe in 1513.

                5. A map on the main grid, from Equator II to the
                               Peninsula of Paria.

     An interesting problem on this component map is the identification of the
Orinoco. The river itself is not shown , and neither is the modern delta . Instead ,
two estuaries extending far inland (for a distance of about 100 miles) are shown
close to the site of the present river. The longitude on the grid would be correct
for the Orinoco, and the latitude is also quite accurate (see Table 1 ). Is it possible
that these estuaries have been filled in , and the delta extended this much since the
source maps were made? If so, this is comparable to the extension of the delta
of the Tigris- Euphrates in Mesopotamia in the last 3, 500 years, since Ur of the
Chaldees lay on the seacoast.

      6. A map from the Gulf of Venezuela to Yucatan , omitting about 7 °
                of coastline between the Gulf of Venezuela and
                             the Peninsula of Paria.

     A point of considerable importance here is the shape of the Atrato River.
According to our grid , the river is shown for a distance of 300 miles from the sea,
and its eastward bend at about 5° North Latitude corresponds to the geographical
facts. This implies that somebody explored the river to its headwaters in the
Western Cordillera of the Andes sometime before 1513. I have found no record
of such an early exploration . Yucatan supposedly had not been discovered in 1513,
either.

         7. The Caribbean Islands: The Leeward and Windward Groups,
           the Virgin Islands, Puerto Rico on the main grid of the map;
                          more questions about Columbus.

     These islands are more accurately placed on this map, in reference to latitude
and longitude, than they are on any other map of the period .
     Piri Re’is wrote, in his long inscription about Columbus, that this part of the
map was based on a map Columbus drew. Here the two different grids overlap
to some extent : Some islands are on the special grid already discussed , and some
are on the main grid . I have pointed out that one of Columbus’ errors may have
been due to not understanding the special grid . The Leeward and Windward
Islands, which Columbus discovered, are on the main grid on this component map.
70   Maps of the Ancient Sea Kings
Nevertheless, it is hardly possible that he could have added them to the map, as
Piri Re’is supposed . For we see them in remarkably correct latitude and longitude
on the trigonometric grid of our hypothetical Alexandrian compilation . Not under -
standing the grid, not even dreaming of its existence, and not being able to find
either correct latitude or correct longitude, how could Columbus have correctly
located the islands? Piri Re’is gives names to these islands, and says that they are
the names given by Columbus, yet the names are wrong! (140:408-409) It looks
as if Piri Re’is here depended upon hearsay information and did not really see a
map drawn by Columbus.
     One group of islands on the Caribbean part of the map, the Virgin Islands,
are so far out of position , so badly drawn, and so far out of scale that they might
well have been added to the map by Columbus or interpolated by Piri Re’is on
the basis of some contemporary report.
     One of the most unusual features of this part of the map is that some features
can be interpreted as two different localities, according to the grid one uses.

      8. The lower east coast of South America from Bahia Blanca to Cape
            Horn (or Cape San Diego) and certain Atlantic islands
                          on the main grid of the map.

     Two of my students, Lee Spencer and Ruth Baraw, discovered that about 900
miles of the east coast of South America were simply missing from the Piri Re’is
Map, two different source maps having apparently been erroneously put together
                                                        —
on the general compilation . Earlier students of the map Kahle, Goodwin , Mallery
— had all assumed that the map was continuous and complete as far as it went.
      Kahle’s assumption of an unbroken coast required a rather forced interpreta -
tion of the map. On this assumption it was necessary to conclude that the map-
making here was very bad . However, it seems that someone before Kahle had had
the same idea . Figure 44 shows how that interpretation actually fits the oblong
grid of the map. The equator is different from that of the main projection , but
the length of the degree of latitude has been increased in the same way. This detail
serves to support our impression of the long and complex history of this map. There
is no way of knowing how many peoples of how many epochs had their fingers
in the pie.
     The method used by Spencer and Baraw to verify their observation of the
omission of the coastline was to try identifying localities by comparison with the
modem map, first from one end of the coast, and then from the other. They
started first with Recife and went all the way down the coast from point to point.
Everything went well as far as Cape Frio, but south of Cape Frio they thought
the Piri Re’is Map ceased to correspond with the modern map at all. Then they
started from the bottom, from what we assumed to be Cape Horn , or Cape San
Diego ( No. 74, Figure 18), and went northward identifying localities. Here again
                                         THE PIRI RE IS MAP        IN    DETAIL   71

everything seemed to agree very well with the modern map until they came to
a point just below Cape Frio. Farther than this they could not go. The missing
coast lay in between . Our grid assisted us very much in the final verification of the
break , for it gave us its value in degrees.
     The omission of the coast between Cape Frio and Bahia Blanca apparently
resulted in a loss of about 16° of South Latitude and about 20° of West Longitude.
Therefore, in Table 1, I have added these amounts of latitude and longitude
to the ones found by our grid . When this is done, the positions of the identified
localities are correct to an average error of less than a degree. More important is
the fact that they are correct relative to each other.
     It appears significant that Piri Re’is, who stuck names taken from explorers’

                                                                                         0°

     1
                                    o    5
                2          3        4
                                                                                         5° S




                                                                                         10 ° S

                               /
                                                                                         15° S




                                                                                         20 ‘ S



                                        TROPIC OF CAPRICORN

                                                                                         25° S

      r     458W           40 ° W         35° W           °
                                                       30 W             25° W

Figure 44 . Alternative Grid for the coast of South America (Piri Re ' is Map).
                                   See Table 15 .
72 Maps of the Ancient Sea Kings
accounts on much of his map ( making numerous errors), did not attempt to place
any names on the southern part of this coast of South America. The reason offers
itself : There were no explorers' accounts . That coast had not been explored by 1513.
      The Falkland Islands appear in this section of the map at the correct latitude
relative to this lower east coast, but there is an error of about 5° in longitude.
The Falklands are supposed to have been discovered by John Davis in 1592, nearly
eighty years after Piri Re’is made his map (68:869).®
      South of Cape Horn , or Cape San Diego, the coast on the Piri Re’is Map
appears to continue unbroken, but here we have been able to identify another
break, or rather omission.

                                 9. The Antarctic.

      Proceeding as in the case of the break in the east coast of South America , we
first identified localities down to the vicinity of Cape Horn ( including specifically
Cape San Diego), then jumped to the next cape to the eastward , assuming as a
working hypothesis that it was the Palmer or Antarctic Peninsula as claimed by
Mallery. This assumption would require that the sea between the Horn and the
Antarctic Peninsula had been omitted by the mapmaker. This assumption appeared
to be supported by our identification of the Shetland Islands. These islands are
not far off the Antarctic coast. The omission of the sea between ( Drake Passage )
automatically would put the South Shetlands too far north by the width of the
strait , which happens to be about 9° . If the reader will compare the positions of the
Falklands and the South Shetlands on a globe with their positions on the Piri Re’is
Map, as we have identified them , he will see how the Antarctic coast seems to
have been simply pushed northward , and Drake Passage omitted .
      Interestingly enough , we find that the same mistake was made on all maps
of the Renaissance showing the Antarctic. When we come, in the next chapter,
to the examination of the map of Oronteus Finaeus, we shall discover the probable
reason for this error.
      The extraordinary implications of Captain Mallery’s claim that part of the
Antarctic Continent is shown on the Piri Re’is Map demand unusually thorough
verification , considering that the continent was supposedly discovered only in 1818.
This is no slight matter. Important questions, for geology as well as for history,
depend upon it . We may begin with a brief survey of the historical background .
      A good many world maps of the 16th Century show an antarctic continent.®


     5
      Though some have given the credit to Amerigo Vespucci.
     6
      A few of these, in addition to those discussed later in this book, are the maps
of Robert Thome (1527), Sebastian Munster (1545), Giacomo Gastaldi (1546),
Abraham Ortelius (1570), Plancius (1592), Hondius (1602), Sanson (1651), Seller
(1670). (See R. V. Tooley [ 206].)
                                       THE PIRI RE IS MAP         IN   DETAIL 73
As we shall see, Gerard Mercator believed in its existence. A comparison of all the
versions suggests that there may have been one or two original versions, drawn
according to different projections, which were copied and recopied with emenda-
tions according to the ideas of different cartographers.
     The belief in the existence of the continent lasted until the time of Captain
Cook , whose voyages into the South Seas demonstrated the non -existence of a
southern continent at least in the latitudes where one appears on these maps ( 112).
The idea of an antarctic continent was then given up, and geographers began to
explain the maps as the work of geographers who had felt the need to have a land
mass at the South Pole to balance off the concentration of land in the northern
hemisphere. This seemed to be the only reasonable explanation , for in the first
place there apparently was no such continent, and in the second place there was
no reason to suppose that anyone in earlier times ( Romans, Greeks, Phoenicians)
could have explored those distant regions.

      When we began our study of the southern sector of the Piri Re’is Map our
first step was to compare it carefully, not with a flat map of the Antarctic, but
with a globe. Figure 45, traced from a photograph of a globe,7 shows a striking
similarity between the Queen Maud Land coast and the coastline on the Piri Re’is
Map. It should be especially noted that on the modern globe the Queen Maud
Land coast lies due south of the Guinea coast of Africa , just as the coastline
referred to by Mallery does on the Piri Re’is Map.8
      This was an encouraging beginning . We went on to make a thorough exami-
nation . We asked ourselves, first, how does the coast in question on the Piri Re’is
Map compare in its extent, character, and position , with the coasts of Queen Maud
Land? (These coasts are named the Princess Martha and Princess Astrid Coasts.)
With the gradual development of the mathematical grid we could answer two of
these questions.
      In the first place, we found that the Piri Re’is coast, according to our grid,
extends through 27° of Longitude as compared with 24° on the modern map, a very
 remarkable degree of agreement. At the latitude of the coasts (about 70° S) a
degree of longitude is only about 20 miles, so that the error is not great . The grid
also shows the coast in good position ; it is about 10°, or 200 miles, too far west.

     7
        We took this step because flat maps distort geography in one way or another,
and unless we found a map on precisely the right projection we could not be sure
of a good comparison.
      8
        Following publication of Mallery’s views in a broadcast of the Georgetown
University Radio Forum of the Air (131), the French publication , “Science et Vie”
(109), published a very confused account, which was taken up in the Soviet press
( 28). A Soviet scientist rejected Mallery’s claim , perhaps because he made the mis-
take of confusing the Queen Maud Land coast with the Queen Maud Mountains
on the other side of the continent.
74   Maps of the Ancient Sea Kings




Figure 45. Relative Longitudes of the Guinea Coast of Africa and the Queen
    Maud Land Coast of Antarctica , for comparison with the Piri Re’ is Map.
                                        THE PIRI RE IS MAP         IN   DETAIL 75
       With regard to latitude, we must take account of the omissions we have noted
      —
above part of the South American coast and Drake Passage. Together these
omissions account for about 25 ° of South Latitude. When these degrees are
added to those found by the grid for the Queen Maud Land coast, the coast
appears in correct latitude (see Fig. 18).
       We have noted that the omission of the South American coastline resulted
in a loss of about 16° of West Longitude. The omission of Drake Passage resulted,
we found, in adding about 4° to this, making 20° to be accounted for. This, with
the 10° westward error of the Queen Maud Land coast, creates a deficit of some
30° between that coast and the Antarctic Peninsula . This appears to be made up
for by the fact that the Weddell Sea, as we have identified it on the map, extends
through only 10° of longitude, instead of 40°, as would be correct.
       Now it might be argued that this result is artificial, and that we have delib-
erately twisted the evidence to support the conclusion, but this is not the case.
My students, Lee Spencer and Ruth Baraw, had already established the omission
of 900 miles of the South American coast without any thought of Antarctica . They
were not interested in the bearing of their discovery on the question of the Queen
Maud Land coast. We did not even see the connection until long afterwards,
when the grid was worked out, and the same is true of the omission of Drake
Passage. The omission is obvious from the map itself : the strait simply isn’ t there.
 In the case of both omissions we were able to measure approximately the amounts
of latitude and longitude involved.
       There is in addition the comparison of the character of the Queen Maud Land
coast, as shown on the ancient and on the modern map. It is plain , from the
modern map, that this coast is a rugged one. Numerous mountain ranges and
individual peaks show up above the present levels of the ice. The Piri Re’is Map
shows the same type of coast, though without any ice. The numerous mountains
are clearly indicated . By a convention of 16 th Century mapmaking heavy shading
of some of the islands indicates a mountainous terrain ( Frontispiece).
       Coming to greater detail, Mallery’s chief argument was the striking agree-
ment of the map with the seismic profile across Queen Maud Land (see Figs.
46, 47, 48, and Note 10) . The reader will note that the profile shows a rugged ter -
 rain , a coastline with mountains behind the coast and high islands in front . The
 points of the profile below sea level coincide very well with the bays between the
 islands on the Piri Re’is Map. This amounts to additional confirmation . The
 identification of specific features of the coast, as shown in Table 1, appears further
 to strengthen the argument.
       If the Piri Re’is Map stood alone, it would perhaps be insufficient to carry
 conviction . But it does not stand alone. We shall shortly see that the testimony of
 this map regarding the Antarctic can be supported by that of several others.
                               wrrx o   TM Nm M OMS




                                                          0


                                                      '




                                                              ?>
                                                              *    w
                                                                       f

                                                                       *   -
                                                                   fr« Un yrflUi
                                                                                   *^

Figure 46 . Cross sections of the Greenland ice cap and the Antarctic ice cap
across Queen Maud Land , showing depths of the ice. (From ‘ ‘The Geographical
Journal,” June, 1954)
                                                                             THE PIRI RE IS MAP                                IN   DETAIL       77




Figure 47. Route of the Norwegian - British - Swedish Seismic Survey Party across
                   Queen Maud Land , 1949. (See Note 10)

                   VERTICAL SCALE EXAGGERATED 20 TIMES
                   I        I ICE
METERS ED WATER                                                          INLAND - ICE
                                                                                                                     NEUMAYER               METERS
3000 -      ROCK                                                            MOUNTAIN                                  VEGGEN                - 3000
                                                                   ADVANCED  REGION
2000 -                                SHELF ICE                       BASE                                                                  - 2000
                                                                                   ^
1000 - MAUDHEIM
                                                                            C                             D,
                                                                                                                                            - 1000
 SEA                                                                                                                                            SEA
LEVEL
1000    ..   i i   nun MI       i n   Min i in iiiai i 11
                                                  ^
                                                            in ii i i HI i ii i lima i n i ni II 11 i i n ii ii i
                                                                |
                                                                     '                   ^            (
                                                                                                                     i   i
                                                                                                                                       i
                                                                                                                                               LEVEL

        0              50       100   150        200          250 300    350                       400         450       500   550    600
                                                                KILOMETERS

Figure 48 . The profile of the Queen Maud Land ice cap: note the extensions of
the ice cap below sea level , A , B, C, D. Compare with the islands and bays of
the Antarctic sector of the Piri Re ’ is Map ( Figure 18). ( After Schytt )
        o
       CHAP
      TER IV
       THE
ff   ANTARCTIC U

&
k
      MAPS OF
     ORONTEUS ®
      FINAEUS f
                ^
lHADJI     *
        AHMED
M      AND
mMERCATOR #/
               JI
                                       1. Oronteus Finaeus.

                       A part of our Piri Re’is investigation, quite naturally, was a
                 search for other portolan charts of the Middle Ages and the Renais -
                 sance that might show Antarctica . Quite a number of these turned
                 up, for, as we have mentioned , many cartographers of the 15th and
                 16th Centuries believed in the existence of a southern continent.
                       In the course of this investigation I arranged to spend some
                 time in the Library of Congress during the Christmas recess of
                 1959-1960.1 wrote ahead to the Chief of the Map Division asking
                 if all the old maps of the periods in question could be brought out
                 and made ready for my inspection , especially those that might
                 show the Antarctic. Dr. Arch C. Gerlach , and his assistant, Richard
                 W. Stephenson , and other members of the staff of the Map Divi-
                 sion were most co-operative, and I found, somewhat to my con-
                 sternation, that they had laid out several hundred maps on the
                 tables of the Reference Room .
                       By arriving at the Library the moment it opened in the morn -
                 ing and staying there until it closed in the evening, I slowly made
                 a dent in the enormous mass of material. I found many fascinating
                 things I had not expected to find , and a number of portolan charts
                 showing the southern continent. Then, one day, I turned a page,
                 and sat transfixed . As my eyes fell upon the southern hemisphere
                 of a world map drawn by Oronteus Finaeus1 in 1531, I had the
instant conviction that I had found here a truly authentic map of the real
Antarctica .
     The general shape of the continent was startlingly like the outline of the
continent on our modern map (see Figs. 51 and 52). The position of the South
Pole, nearly in the center of the continent, seemed about right . The mountain
ranges that skirted the coasts suggested the numerous ranges that have been
discovered in Antarctica in recent years. It was obvious, too, that this was no slap-
dash creation of somebody’s imagination . The mountain ranges were individualized ,

     1
         See Notes 11, 12, 13.
                                                         HERMANS


                                                          .
                                                                  adl
                                                         Intibi Candi
                                                     biA miinonuifan
                                                                        .
                                                     Or onnus Firms D
                                                              .
                                                     offers 91« quidrn
                                                     formam< obtinrt <
                                                      ^           *
                                                     ar ctiamProuinf
                                                     nuns,Monies,had
                                                     lonuo. nrtg Eudoi
                                                     Macrobio tognira
                                                     hunc uf< diem ia<
                                                                  *
                                                     rcntar Tu tgtrurhc
                                                     ambabus ulius fufc
                                                                      Aai



Figure 49. The Oronteus Finaeus World Map of 1532.
 VENRAfc D
rctn   .
tftor Gtographian
mratd$ imprHTam
inatct Irpidouultu
 du hum an i facinn
 ouidctibi cordi fit )
Infulas . Mam Flu .
               . ^.
i non uifa nr Pto
\e<t Erarohcnt aut
I qur in tmchntin
unr .ruo obruruir <
inufoilum fi tots)
» bomcj vonfuDto.
if It      .
82   Maps of the Ancient Sea Kings



                                                                       O
                                                                              *it
                                                                       /      ox

                                                                       •MtfU
                                                                       ;r j

                                                                       •qdpji
                                                                       > «
                                                                         *
                                                                       JUK




      Figure 50. The Oronteus Finaeus World Map of 1532, Antarctica.
                                                          THE     ANTARCTIC MAPS         83
some definitely coastal and some not. From most of them rivers were shown
flowing into the sea, following in every case what looked like very natural and
very convincing drainage patterns. This suggested , of course, that the coasts may
have been ice-free when the original map was drawn . The deep interior , however,
was free entirely of rivers and mountains, suggesting that the ice might have been
present there.
     At the beginning of our study we made a comparison of the proportions of
Antarctica as this map shows them with those shown on modern maps . I measured
two traverses across the continent on modern maps and compared their ratio
with the ratio of the same traverses on the map of Oronteus Finaeus. These traverses
were (a ) from the Antarctic ( Palmer ) Peninsula at 69° S and 60° W 2 to the Sabrina
Coast of Wilkes Land at 66° S and 120° E; and ( b) from the Ross Sea (Queen
Maud Range) at 85-88° S and 180° E /W, to the Muhlig-Hofmann Mountains, in
Queen Maud Land , at 72° S and 0° E /W, measuring in centimeters. On the
Oronteus Finaeus Map (a small one ) I measured in millimeters (since the ratios
alone counted ) with the following results :

                                      The Modern Map
             Palmer Peninsula to the Sabrina Coast                           78.5 cm.
             Ross Sea to Queen Maud Coast                                    38.0 cm.

                               The Oronteus Finaeus Map
             Palmer Peninsula to the Sabrina Coast                           129.0 mm.
             Ross Sea to the Queen Maud Land Coast                            73.0 mm.

                                     38 : 78.5   2.06
                     Thus we have:                   , or a ratio of 8: 7.
                                     73.129      1.76

     It is improbable that this close agreement is accidental.
     Examining this map of Antarctica on the grid of latitude lines drawn by
Oronteus Finaeus, we observed that he had extended the Antarctic Peninsula too
far north by about 15°. At first I thought he might simply have placed the whole
continent too far north in the direction of South America . Further examination,
however, showed that the shores of his Antarctic Continent extended too far in all
directions, even reaching the tropics! The trouble, it would seem, therefore, was
with the scale. By using an oversized map the compiler was forced to crowd the
Antarctic Peninsula up against Cape Horn, squeezing out Drake Passage almost
entirely. Furthermore, the mistake must have been made far back, for we find the
identical error in all the Antarctic maps of the period , including that of Piri Re’is.

     2
      We measured from the beginning of the broad part of the Peninsula because
study seemed to show that the upper, narrow part of the Peninsula was omitted
from the Oronteus Finaeus Map, as it apparently also had been from the Piri Re’is
Map.
                                                                      r
                                                          '                     v
                                                                                             \
                                                      /                                          \

                                              /                                                          \
                                          /                                                                  s
                                      /                                                                          \

                              /                                                                                      \
                          /
                          /                                                                                              \

                                                                                                                             \
                  »                                                                                                          \
                                                                                                                                 \

              /                                                                                                                      \
          I                                                                                                              J               \
          I

      I
      I

      I
                                                                                                                                     i
      I                                                           A                                                                          .
      \
          \                                                                    \                                                         /
                                                                                                                                     Ij
              \

                  \                                               o
                                                                  ;
                                                                                                                             /
                   \
                      \
                              \
                                  \

                                      \                                                                          /
                                              \                                                              /
                                                  V

                                                                                             /




                                                                                                                                                     a




                                                              I




Mlp
   ^^ .
      Vih eufFfnl^'
the modern map, d Antarctica
                                                      or
                                                        ( )           ^
                                                                          1
                                                                              <a) 2 modern
                                                                                                 *   ’       <b> ,hc OronteusFinaeus
                                                                                                                                                 'IMV"*" °'
                                   /
                                  /                                                                            \
                              /                                                                                 \

                    /                                                                                                      \
                    /                                          o
                                                                                                                                       \
                •
                s                          A
                                                                                                                                        \
            /
                                                                                                                                            \
                                                                                                                                                \
    /                                                                                                                                               \
                                                                                                                                                        \
    T                                                                                                                                                   I
    l
                                                                     ITH
                                                                   POLE
                                                                                                                                                        I
                                                                                                                                                    I
        \                                          SOUTH POLE                                                                                       /

            \
                                                   ( ORONTEUS
                                                      FINAEUS)
                                                               •           \                                                                /
                                                                                                                                            /
            \

                \                                                                                                                      /
                \
                                                                                                                                   /
                    \
                        \                                                                                                  /
                              \
                                  \
                                                                                                                   /
                                                                                                           /
                                                                                                       /


                                                               1

b




                                                                                         N.
                                                                                              N,
                                                                                                   \
                                           /                                                           \
                                       /
                                       /                                                                    \
                                                                                                               \
                                   /                                                                               \

                                                                                                                       \
                              /                                                                                        \
                                                                                                                           \
                                                                               N
                                                           /                    \                                              \
                        I                                  /                     \
                                                                                                                               \
                        I                              /                             \
                                                                                                                                   l
                        I                             I                              \
                                                      +                              T
                        \                             \                              I                                     C \i
                                                                                                                           ?
                                                       \
                        \
                        \
                        \
                                                           \
                                                           \                   /
                                                                                /
                                                                                     /
                                                                                                                       Vi   I
                                                                                                                             I
                          \                                                                                                /
                            \                                                                                           /
                              \                                                                                        /
                               \
                                                                                                                   /
                                                                                                                /
                                                                                                               /
                                                                                                           /
                                                                                                        /
                                           \                                                           /
                                               \




d
86      Maps of the Ancient Sea Kings
 a)




 b)




(c )




 (d )




Figure 52. Antarctic coasts of the Oronteus Finaeus Map, (right ) , compared
                    with those of the modern map , (left ).
                                                     THE   ANTARCTIC MAPS          87
It is possible, indeed, that this mistake may account for the omission at some
ancient period , on the source map used by Piri Re’is, of a large part of the coastline
of South America : There was simply no room for it!
      As our study continued, it gradually began to appear that Oronteus Finaeus’
network of parallels and meridians did not fit the Antarctic as shown on his world
map. Apparently a projection had been imposed by him on a source map originally
drawn with a very different kind of map grid . How were we to discover the nature
of this original network of parallels and meridians?
      The first step seemed obvious . It was simply to remove the network of lines
applied to the map by Oronteus Finaeus. We made a tracing of the map, leaving
off these lines but retaining, for the moment, his position for the South Pole, and
his Antarctic Circle. Since he could have had no way of knowing the position of
the pole in the interior of the continent, we considered that his source map must
have shown the pole.
      The position of the pole looked quite correct at first glance, as I have men -
tioned , but, as our study and comparison of the old map with modern maps
continued, we could see that the mapmaker had apparently made a mistake of a
few degrees in locating the pole. We found what seemed a truer position by
measuring across the continent in several directions and finding the position that
would divide all the diameters of the continent in approximately the same ratio
as shown on modern maps. This was, of course, an extension of our first measure-
ment already mentioned . It was only an empirical experiment, but it seemed to
give a more satisfactory result in terms of the latitudes of identifiable places.
      With our adjusted pole as a center, I now constructed a grid on the supposition
that the original projection might have been the equidistant polar projection, one
that is said to have been known in ancient times (see Fig . 25). In this system
the meridians are straight lines radiating from a pole. The parallels of latitude are
circles. In order to fix the latitudes I had to find one circle at a known distance
from the pole. The obvious thing to do was to locate the Antarctic Circle, which
is approximately 23 % ° from the pole, by comparing the old map with the new .
 It so happens that Antarctica is circular and lies almost within the Antarctic Circle.
 It was comparatively easy to draw about the continent on the old map a circle
that would pass at about the right distances from the various coasts, as compared
with a modern map. This was, in fact, one method we used to relocate our pole.
      Since the Antarctic Circle is 23 ° from the pole, it was now possible to
                                        ^
measure out one degree by dividing the distance to the pole on our draft map by
     -
 23 V& With the length of the degree thus determined, we could then lay out circles
10 ° apart : the 80 th and 70 th parallels of latitude. Now we had the parallels neces-
sary for our grid .
      When it came to the meridians, we had to deal with another problem . It did
 not seem to us at first that the continent was properly oriented in relation to the
other continents. To get correct longitude readings for our Antarctic coasts on the
88   Maps of the Ancient Sea Kings
old map we naturally had to line it up with the meridians on the modern map.
It was possible, of course, that, if we were dealing with an authentic map of
Antarctica that had survived for several millennia , somebody could have placed it
askew on a world map. We thought it looked as if the continent ought to be rotated
about 20 ° to the east to bring it into correct relationship to the other continents.
We selected empirically what looked like a reasonable “ prime meridian ” and then
laid out the other meridians at five-degree intervals, thus constructing our grid .
      At this point we made another vital discovery. I noticed that the circle we
had drawn for the 80 th parallel was almost exactly the size of the circle Oronteus
                                                                   —
Finaeus had drawn on his map and labeled Circulus Antarcticus Antarctic Circle.
The true Antarctic Circle follows a path in the sea off the Antarctic coasts; this
Antarctic Circle of Oronteus Finaeus, on the other hand , was in the center of the
continent . This suggested that Oronteus Finaeus, or a predecessor, in interpreting
some old source map may have mistaken for the Antarctic Circle a circle upon the
map intended to represent the 80th parallel . This mistake would have exaggerated
the size of Antarctica about four times. Since every Renaissance map of the
Antarctic seems to reflect this mistake, it is highly likely that the error goes back
to Alexandria, or to some earlier period.
      A very extraordinary aspect of this matter is that, with the correction of scale,
the size of the Antarctic Continent on the map of Oronteus Finaeus is correct, by
modern findings. The reader may check this matter by comparing the distribution
of the land masses inside and outside the Antarctic Circle as it is shown on the
ancient and modern maps (see Figs. 53 and 54 ) .
      The reader may well ask how it could happen that an ancient map, a map
ancient even in classical times, could have had parallels of latitude indicated at
ten -degree intervals, when this method of counting by tens and using a circle
divided into 360 degrees was supposedly only applied to maps in the Renaissance.
This question will be answered in connection with another matter. Meanwhile, the
presumption that the ancients had a correct idea of the size of the Antarctic
Continent suggests that they may also have had a correct idea of the size of the
earth , knowledge that appears, indeed , to be reflected in the Piri Re’is Map.
      Once we had a grid constructed , as I have described above, we tried to identify,
by comparison with modern maps, as many places on this map of Antarctica
as possible. The result was electrifying. All the errors of the location of places that
we had identified on Oronteus Finaeus’ own grid were greatly reduced . Some of
the tentative identifications we had made on the basis of his grid had to be given
 up, but many new places were identified , so that our list of identified geographical
features in Antarctica was increased from sixteen to thirty- two. For this grid we
abandoned our empirically derived 80 th parallel and simply used Oronteus Finaeus’
own so-called Circulus Antarcticus as our 80th parallel . We found that by doing
 this we improved the accuracy of the grid . In other words, it seemed more clear
than ever that the circle, misnamed by some early geographer , had originally been
intended to be the 80 th parallel and nothing else.
                                                   THE   ANTARCTIC MAPS 89
     However, notwithstanding the amazing accuracy in the positions of many
places, there were still numerous errors. We continued to experiment with rotating
the continent a few degrees one way or the other, and changing by ever so little
the position of the pole, but there were still plenty of discrepancies.
     Then it appeared that this ancient map of Antarctica seemed to have been
put together, like the Piri Re’is Map, from a number of local maps of different
coasts, and perhaps not put together correctly. An analysis of the errors in our
tables showed that, so far as longitudes were concerned , the errors differed in
direction in different parts of the map. The average of longitude errors in Wilkes
Land , for example, was easterly, while in the Ross Sea area and Victoria Land it
was westerly. I had a transparent overlay made of the Oronteus Finaeus Map, so
that we could place it over a modern map, and shift it around as we pleased .
We found that the Oronteus Finaeus Map could be aligned remarkably well with
a modern map, but we had to shift it around to different positions to make the
individual segments of the coasts fit. It seemed impossible to make all the coasts
fit at once. (See Fig . 52.) It seemed clear that we had in hand a compilation of
local maps made by people who were not as well acquainted with the area as those
who had originally mapped the separate coasts.
      As I have mentioned , we worked for a long time on the assumption that the
original projection , on which the compilation had been made, was of a sort that
had meridians that were straight lines. But, on this basis, we were never able to
get a satisfactory alignment of Antarctica with other continents. I was therefore
forced to finally consider the possibility that the meridians might have been curved
like those that actually appear on the Oronteus Finaeus Map. And so it turned out.
With a grid redrawn on this basis (see Fig. 53) the identified places on the map
were increased in number from thirty- two to fifty, and the averages of errors again
were reduced, as shown in Table 2.®
      At this point we should pause to consider in somewhat greater detail the
 obviously serious question of the ice cap which now covers the whole continent .
 We are not here concerned with the geological problem of accounting for a warm
 period in Antarctica within the lifetime of the human race. Rather, we are
 concerned with just what the map shows. It would appear that the map shows
 non -glacial conditions extending for a considerable distance inland on some of
 the coasts. These coasts include, it seems, the coasts of Queen Maud Land , Enderby
 Land , Wilkes Land , Victoria Land ( the east coast of the Ross Sea ), and Marie


     3
       This finding, of course, affects very much our visual comparison of the an   -
cient and modern maps. Since they appear to have been drawn on different pro-
jections they would naturally look different, even if they were identical. Therefore,
the agreement of the two may actually be greater than it appears. Table 2 indicates
this. In Fig. 51c Charles Halgren of the Caru Studios in New York has redrawn the
Oronteus Finaeus Map on a projection using straight meridians. This may be com      -
pared with the modern map.
        90         Maps of the Ancient Sea Kings
        Byrd Land . Notably lacking in definite identifiable points are the west coast of the
        Ross Sea, Ellsworth Land , and Edith Ronne Land.
             A comparison of the Oronteus Finaeus Map with the map of the subglacial
        land surfaces of Antarctica produced by survey teams of various nations during the
        International Geophysical Year ( 1958) seems to explain some of the apparent
        shortcomings of the Oronteus Finaeus Map, and at the same time throws some
        light on the question of the probable extent of glacial conditions when the original
        maps were drawn .
             Figure 55 shows what the IGY teams discovered the actual land forms under


                                                                                      180°



                                                   /
                                                                         2                                            \
                                                                                                                          \

                                                                         23                                                    S
                                                   122                                                                             \
                                      /                                   25                                                           \
                                  /                                                  26
                                                                                                                                               \
                                                                                                                                                   \
                                                                                 2
                                                                                                   4:
                                                                         28                                                                                \
                                                                         .29
                                                                                              41         40 45                47                               \
                                                                                                                                                                   \
                  / 19                                                       30
                                                                                                    O
                                                                                                                 46
                                                                                                        39                         48
                                                                                                                                    ,
                                                                                                                                                                       \
              7                                                                                                       49                                                   \
              /                                                                                                               to
        17'                                                                          33
         •F 16                                                                                                                                 50
                                                                                          3236/38'                             51
                                                                                                                                 5                                                 90° W
                                                             O   .           o

                          -
                         o                     o
90° E         15         O                     un
                                                             8                 in
                                                                               00                                                          53
                         r


                                                                                                                                                                               I
                                                                                                                                                                        I
              \
              \       &to                                                                                                                                              /

                  \                                                                                              55                                                    \
                   \
                    \

                           -
                         lev 12
                                                                                                                                                       Wt
                                                                                                                                                       /




                                                                                     .A
                                                                                                                                                   /
                              \           10                 8                                                                             /
                                  9                                                       4
                                          \              7           6
                                                   \                                                    1
                                                                                                                          /
                                                                                 p
                                                                                          i




                                                                                          0°

                           .
        Figure 53 The modern map of Antarctica. Numbers correspond with those on
                    the Oronteus Finaeus Map, Figure 54. See Table 2.
                         °
                       170         180°      170°         °
                                                        160       150  °   140 °   130 °        °
                                                                                           120 110  °
160?


150?


140'


130   °
120   °
110   °                                                                                                 100  °
100   °                                                                                                  °
                                                                                                        90




 80
                                                                                                         °
                                                                                                        90

 70   °                                                                                                  °
                                                                                                        80


 60°

50'


40°


30 °
20 °
 10°
  0°
 10°
20 °
                       30    °      40   °      50
                                                    °   60    °70     80   ° 90    °        °
                   .
          Figure 54 The Oronteus Finaeus Map of 1531: tracing with projection lines as
                                                                   .
                    determined by the study of the topography See Table 2.
92    Maps of the Ancient Sea Kings
the present Antarctic ice cap to be. It is noticeable that, contrary to surface appear -
ances, there is no western shore to the Ross Sea; rather, the rock surface of the
continent is below sea level straight across from the Ross Sea to the Weddell Sea ,
and most of Ellsworth Land is also below sea level. If the ice cap melted , all these
                           —
areas would be shallow sea not land .
     It is plain , of course, that if the western coast of the Ross Sea and the coast
of Ellsworth Land are, in fact, non -existent, the absence of definite physical features
in these sections of the Oronteus Finaeus Map is well explained . But , it seems that
the ice cap may already have been in existence at least in West Antarctica when
the original maps were drawn , for the interior waterways connecting the Ross,
Weddell, and Amundsen Seas are not shown .




       o°
       Cb




Figure 55. Recent map of sub- glacial topography of Antarctica , as shown by
    seismic surveys carried out during the International Geophysical Year.
                                                      THE   ANTARCTIC MAPS          93
      The Antarctic ( Palmer ) Peninsula presents a point of special interest. As
already noted , only the base of the Peninsula can be identified on the Oronteus
Finaeus Map. The upper part of the Peninsula is missing. We find , now, from
the results of the IGY investigations, that there is, in fact, no such peninsula . There
is, in fact, what would be an island if the ice cap melted . It would seem , then ,
that even if a great deal of ice was already in existence when the original map of
this portion of the Antarctic was drawn , the ice cap had not yet covered the area
of shallow sea between the continental shore and this island .
      It must, of course, be remembered that thousands of years may have elapsed
between the drafting of the earliest and latest of the original maps of different parts
of Antarctica . We cannot therefore draw the conclusion that there was a time
when there was a great deal of ice in East Antarctica and none in West Antarctica.
The maps of East Antarctica may have been drawn thousands of years later than
the others.
      Another very extraordinary map may serve to throw some light on this. Buache,
 the 18th Century French geographer already referred to, left a map of Antarctica
 that may show the continent at a time when there was no ice at all (see Fig. 56) .
 Compare this with the IGY map of the land masses ( Fig. 55). If an apparent
error in the orientation of the continent to other land masses is disregarded , it is
quite easy to imagine that this map shows the waterways connecting the Ross,
Weddell, and Bellingshausen Seas.
      When we discovered that the meridians of the original map were curved ,
essentially as Oronteus Finaeus had constructed them , it was no longer necessary
 to rotate his map of the Antarctic eastward in order to bring it into agreement with
 the other land masses. Instead , it became apparent that his source map of South
 America and his source map of Antarctica probably came to him in one piece.
Their relative longitudes were correct.
      The eastern hemisphere on the Oronteus Finaeus Map of 1531 in no way
compares with the Antarctic and South American parts. He seems to have based
 his Mediterranean , for example, on the inaccurate Ptolemy maps rather than on
 the portolanos.4
      Among the most remarkable features of the Oronteus Finaeus Map is the part
we identify as the Ross Sea . The modern map indicates (dotted lines in Fig. 53)
the places where great glaciers, like the Beardmore and Scott Glaciers, pour down
their millions of tons of ice annually to the sea . On the Oronteus Finaeus Map
( Fig. 50), fiord -like estuaries are seen, along with broad inlets and indications of
rivers of a magnitude that is consistent with the sizes of the present glaciers. And
some of these fiords are located remarkably close to the correct positions of the
glaciers (see Table 2).

    * For further discussion of the projection of the Oronteus Finaeus Map see
Notes 11, 12, 13, 22.
     n A I T n i r r o K i G E CXTEERBS AVSTR LES
  ' \uWdej xJn { oatttj \Aiz\e ff /o-Mjurir partmtduPsrt
                                                              ^               ^
  ' t lr           y assent la Lupic leu .Octo . amvent
   k
    *
    . i a / Amne sur Lx Cdtt duTfrrsU .

       font t*%nle de rrttr fsLpour a /Lr cAercUsr
   f ntv . par L A\\
      0
                       . * lony . \t xoJdrmne A
  \ i , ty iat 'ctjjf .0 /oiip Son vont on
   / / . fisfiqyurr les ob * otr aim pci
                                    *
     Pile aduretjusq. xa Janvier
     < ) n a Comnunue a voir du
  n •leftn't <posso*                          Balcvus
     / iujPaSy 0 x o / at ‘ t
   is
          ^
  / Sc a' qyant pros dt

 r* Terr on a send
        *            *
  ' uvcr t it fond A
  %


 isses
 is      houi qucuj' lbn
         dufur I Etc                     ft

 U' lfi    { fxUprocht
 toe      \c\o Int++ fl
  IfV
           ^
         Hmdten                          I
 r i l ' V u c cst Ij
 met Um par II
 I *'I   \V Gnnrpvn
 nr auiTimlrrJl
                                                  * *s
 * pulifitU                 * II
                            ft            l          N


\icte ouquhUsM
  quuju Lrlc •                   I
                   %                 1
 /       tyaL aceUf 1
u>\ lony 7 * Lur 1
 Old          yulesP.

      qui ontLulJoup
dej Torres voismar\
                                 —
                                 '}


rt SxJ Loyj 6 * xi.
  ^
                                                 VVj.
on obfde x+TXJ rt
 ltsBouj7bLs donoieni
 r^ diffo T' hryjuian
               ’
                                               ^^\       yA


 ion adeia rprouve en v.

                                                         ^
 huntdcsplaces                                dansla
 //<m ftdaexrleDttiLDavtf
. P - Jinv Puf duruTerrffb                                \

 aSf *lat              ft   a. 2.$ *3o l* y\o
 nomse lcC delaCirconcUion
»; x/ f i x    /
         fours ans vpou voir ob mirr


                                    *
                                     %

c deeGlares, .ULi Brume,etdss vm r » m
                                       **
                                         \                        ^   1


 au i3 enacxmr-uLsi' laLpendt xSU '
                                      +
' inr ' Jes }irdeu%os et cLsLoupsALxnsxstAcc
 v. a ++ 30 Let eta 6*lonq LsPT^sosvr / fparos
•uvft afaURoute truC . df Bont                                        ^
UeFrxorf Lf 4 Mxr « mcuiliaqe an CdrBFJp
( <
    fdona ivit ctr partra / E roe les/orttsVmr ^lavoient fait Cord*       ^


•a JesLxSJanvlr 3 iJJopart du Capsimxroe en ¥ rxr\ctle 24. . ^
1 rans prrte daucun k o f h e main re Idriremefitly uo duVoyaye




Figure 56. Sub - glacial topography of Antarctica , suggested by the 18th century
                            French geographer Buache.
Jo

                                          CAR TE
                     DES            T E R R E S ARS TRA INS,
                       Compri ses                          entrc JeTrop inne
                            du Capric orn* rtle Pole AnUrcii que .
                                    usevoyent lesNouv rUe # drcouvrrt rj
                                       fattes en i/ jjp an Sud du Cap de
                                        Bounr Erperan ce. ParUsOrdre r de                                        ^

                                     KZ
                                           ^   JIT' DELA COM PAGNI E DESISDFS

                                                           Dresser sur les Hemcnres ft         .
                                                               Li Carte Or cfinaU de
                                                                 Mrde LoiifrB oirvrt            ^
                                                               i A,ir e He ceHe & rpediti ,n\
                                                                               ^
                                                                       Par Philipp e B u a r h f
                                                                        •ie lActuiernie  des
                                                                   Sciences , Gendre de
                                                                    feu NC I ) rInIr P?
                                                             «\ *
                                                                  A
                                                              \ « 1 Geovniphe
                                                                        *• r
                                                                                  du ROY
                                                                     De/a meme dead
                                                                                      Aujiuen tec
                                                                                    dr divrrie\ vucs
                                                                                     Phvsiqu cs &c .
                                                                                                *7A4
                                                                                      PLAN
                                                                                   (W E drsTerrcf

                                                                                    nu CAPDELA
                                                                                   ClRCONCISION
                                                                                   Sutte a \ j         tie,tree
                                                                                JeLatitude Mem / ^
                                                                               F*          azjdea
                                                                               Ja mm deLmentude




                                                                                           . -
                                                                               fluje / i i / E\£ . eta
                                                                                               •f t S E
                                                                                                               t* h

                                                                                Cnconcin on
                                                                                    Crttr r*nmc*
                                                                                               < rfttOKf
                                                                                              »V / w MM
                                                                                         ft   Jr I ' /W M            y If

                                                                                         <* Jre  .  t +JS   1» Lt t+r Jr

                                                                                                      Jflrm




                                      -
                                  mur wt
                                *dftmie                                ~
                                           nvwtr » n swe pr* rm r w >«w •                /h
                                           Urue^   fttsf** *•# *   >A          Je is%*
                                                                                      1.1 f m f t
                                                    J          i                    +
                                .
     sets A'Ati'i /fiV «/•* / » / uJx‘ ftue R ** Jet Strict***'
                                                             '
                                                                   -       f
                                                                           *’ J «   * / •/*/•«/
                                                                                     %                iTJR .
96       Maps of the Ancient Sea Kings
      The open estuaries and rivers are evidence that, when this source map was
made, there was no ice on the Ross Sea or on its coasts. There had also to be a
considerable hinterland free of ice to feed the rivers. At the present time all these
coasts and their hinterlands are deeply buried in the mile- thick ice cap, while on
the Ross Sea itself there is a floating ice shelf hundreds of feet thick .
      The idea of a temperate period in the Ross Sea in time so recent as is indicated
by this map will, at first acquaintance, be incredible to geologists. It has been their
view that the Antarctic ice cap is very ancient, perhaps several million years old ,
although , curiously enough , it seems that previously in the long history of the
globe the climate of Antarctica was often warm and sometimes even tropical
(85: 58-61).®
      In answer to this possible objection I can cite, in addition to the map itself ,
only one further piece of evidence, but it is a very impressive piece of evidence
indeed . In 1949, on one of the Byrd Antarctic Expeditions, some sediments were
taken from the bottom of the Ross Sea , by coring tubes lowered into the sea .
 Dr . Jack Hough , of the University of Illinois, took three cores to learn something
of the climatic history of the Antarctic. The cores were taken to the Carnegie
 Institution in Washington , D.C., where they were subjected to a new method of
 dating developed by the nuclear physicist Dr . W . D. Urry.6
      This method of dating is called , for short, the ionium method . It makes use of
 three different radioactive elements found in sea water. These elements are uranium ,
 ionium , and radium , and they occur in a definite ratio to each other in the water.
They decay at different rates, however; this means that when the sea water contain -
 ing them is locked up in sediments at the bottom of the ocean and all circulation
of the water is stopped , the quantities of these radioactive elements diminish , but
 not at the same rate. Thus, it is possible, when these sediments are brought up
and examined in the laboratory, to determine the age of the sediments by the
amount of change that has taken place in the ratios of the elements still found
 in the sediments.
      The character of sea- bottom sediments varies considerably according to the
 climatic conditions existing when they were formed . If sediment has been carried
 down by rivers and deposited out to sea it will be very fine grained , more fine
 grained the farther it is from the river mouth. If it has been detached from the
 earth’s surface by ice and carried by glaciers and dropped out to sea by icebergs, it
 will be very coarse. If the river flow is only seasonal, that is if it flows only in
summer, presumably from melting glaciers inland , and freezes up each winter, the
 sediment will be deposited somewhat like the annual rings in a tree in layers or
 “ varves.”
      All these kinds of sediments were found in the cores taken from the Ross Sea

     See Chapter VII.
     5

     Not to be confused with another nuclear physicist, Dr. Harold D. Urey, of
     8

the University of Chicago.
                                                                   THE   ANTARCTIC MAPS 97
     SUGGESTED            AGE   CORE N - 5   CORE N 44 CORE N - 3
    CORRELATION      IN YEARS 70 ° 17 ' S    6 9 ° 12 ' S 68 ° 26 ' S
                       ( URRY ) 2990 M       3130 M       3292 M
                        500
                       1000   -!             m             m                 TYPE OF SEDIMENT
                       5000 J                m
    ’' CLIMATIC
      OPTIMUM "
        LATE
     WISCONSIN
                       10 M
                       20 M
                       30 M
                               i
                               i   >
                                   >iv
                                                                         ^    Coarse Glacial Marine

                                                                              Medium Glacial Marine

   INTERGLACIAL        40 M -
                       50 M    “
                                   »:
                                   >
                                   '///A
                                             ^4
                                                           w//
                                                           v
                                                           » «
                                                                             Jpine Glacial Marine
          IOWAN
    SANGAMON
                      100 M        m
                                   m
                                               5
                                                           •v*
                                                                               Isolated Pebble in
                                                                               Fine Grained Matrix
                                                                               Fine Grained
   INTERGLACIAL                     y///z.                                     Well Sorted
                      200 M -                                            |   | Laminated Fine Grained
                                   •V«                                   I   I Well Sorted
         ILLINOIAN
                      300 M        mvrtv>
                                   V//A




     YARMOUTH
   INTERGLACIAL       400 M                               I
                      500 M
                                                          i
                      600 M
         KANSAN
                       700 M -
     AFTONIAN
   INTERGLACIAL
                      800 M
                                                           i
     NEBRASKAN
                       900 M


                      1000 M

                               Figure 57. The Ross Sea cores.

bottom. As you will see from the illustration ( Fig. 57) there were many different
layers of sediment in the coring tubes. The most surprising discovery was that a
number of the layers were formed of fine-grained , well -assorted sediments such as
is brought down to the sea by rivers flowing from temperate ( that is, ice- free ) lands.
As you can see, the cores indicate that during the last million years or so there
have been at least three periods of temperate climate in Antarctica when the shores
of the Ross Sea must have been free of ice.T
     This discovery would indicate that the glacial history of Antarctica may have
been roughly similar to that of North America, where we have had three or more
ice ages in the last million years. Let us remember that, if most geologists cannot
imagine how Antarctica could have had warm climates at short and relatively

     7
         See Note 14, for Hough’s interpretation of the cores.
98    Maps of the Ancient Sea Kings

recent geological intervals, neither can they explain how North America could have
had arctic conditions at equally short intervals and just as equally recently. Ice ages
remain for geologists an unsolved mystery (85 : 35).
     The date found by Dr. Urry for the end of the last warm period in the Ross
Sea is of tremendous interest to us. All three cores agree that the warm period
ended about 6,000 years ago, or about 4000 B.C. It was then that the glacial kind
of sediment began to be deposited on the Ross Sea bottom in the most recent of
Antarctic ice ages. The cores indicate that warm conditions had prevailed for a
long time before that.
     An important fact about the Oronteus Finaeus Map is that all the rivers on
it are shown flowing from mountain ranges near the coasts, except those near the
southern tip of South America . No rivers are shown in the deep interior. This
suggests that, very possibly, when the source maps were made, the interior was
already covered by the ice cap. In that case, the ice cap was an advancing conti-
nental glacier that had not yet brimmed the encircling mountain ranges to reach
the sea, nor had it yet stopped the flow of rivers on the seaward side of the
mountains.
      Let us connect this situation for a moment in regards to the Princess Martha
Coast as we have identified it on the Piri Re’is Map. It would seem that the ice
cap had not yet crossed the mountains that stretch along behind that coast.
Supposing the ice cap to have advanced from the direction of the South Pole,
                                       —
which area would it have reached first the Princess Martha Coast or the Ross Sea ?
It would have reached the Ross Sea first, and the shores of that sea would no
doubt have been glaciated quite a good deal earlier than the Princess Martha Coast,
in fact, possibly some thousands of years before. If this was the case the ancient
voyages to the Princess Martha Coast that may be reflected in the Piri Re’is Map
may have been made as recently as about 1000 B.C. While this may go a little way
to relieve the historian of the problem of accounting for the mapping of that
particular coast, it does nothing to help him in the Ross Sea area , for there it seems
that the mapping would have to have been done at least 6,000 years ago.
     So far, then , we find that this map of Oronteus Finaeus seems to be based on
an authentic ancient source map of Antarctica compiled from local maps of the
coasts drawn before the Antarctic ice cap had reached them . The individual maps
of the different coasts are fairly accurate, taking account of the differences that
may be attributed to the presence of the ice cap now over the coasts. In addition,
the general compilation, which successfully placed the coasts in correct latitudes
and relative longitudes and found a remarkably correct area for the continent,
reflects an amazing geographical knowledge of Antarctica such as was not achieved
in modern times until the twentieth century. The minor error in the location of
the pole was perhaps subsequent to the date of compilation of the general map.
     This map appears to confirm our impression as to the presence of a part of
the Antarctic coast on the Piri Re’is Map. We have been successful, it would
seem , in the quest for supporting evidence.
                                                    THE   ANTARCTIC MAPS         99

                      2. The remarkable map of Hadji Ahmed.8
     In some respects this Turkish map of 1559 is one of the most remarkable I
have seen (see Fig. 58). There is a striking difference between the drawing of the
eastern and western hemispheres. The eastern hemisphere seems to have been
based on the sources available to geographers of the time, mostly Ptolemy, and to
be somewhat ordinary. The map of the Mediterranean is still evidently based on
Ptolemy instead of on the much better portolan maps. The African coasts do not
compare in accuracy with the same coasts on the Piri Re’is Map of 1513 or on
other maps to be discussed shortly.
     But if this is true of the eastern hemisphere, it is an entirely different story
in the west, and here it is evident that the cartographer had at his disposal some
most extraordinary source maps. The shapes of North and South America have a
surprisingly modern look; the western coasts are especially interesting. They seem
to be about two centuries ahead of the cartography of the time. Furthermore, they
appear to have been drawn on a highly sophisticated spherical projection . The
shape of what is now the United States is about perfect .
     This remarkable accuracy of the Pacific coasts of the Americas, and the diffi -
culty of imagining how they could have been drawn in the middle of the 16th Cen -
tury,9 adds significance to another detail of the map : the suggestion of a land
bridge connecting Alaska and Siberia . This land bridge actually existed in the
so-called Ice Age. The map suggests that the land bridge was a broad one, perhaps
a thousand miles across ( Fig. 59).
     In case the reader is drawing back at this moment, in a state of amazement
mingled with horror , I am forced to remind him that this bit of evidence is only
a link in a chain . We have completed a study of the Piri Re’is Map of 1513, and
have concluded that it may contain a representation of part of the Antarctic
coast drawn before the present ice cap covered it. We have examined the 1531
Oronteus Finaeus Map of Antarctica and have come to much more far -reaching
conclusions. We cannot estimate, of course, the lapse of time implied by these
remarkable maps of Antarctica . But we have presented evidence that the deglacial
or unglaciated period in the Antarctic cannot have come to an end later than
6,000 years ago and must have existed for a very long time before that. The warm
period in the Antarctic may, then , have coincided with the last glacial period in
North America . If this is true it follows that this map need be based on maps no
older than the maps already discussed.
     A more detailed examination reveals further interesting facts. The grid drawn
on the map enables us to check accuracy. This particular projection has all the
meridians curved except one, which we refer to as the prime meridian . The reader

    8
      For a discussion of this map see Marie Armand d’Avesac-Macaya, “ Note sur
un Mappemonde Turke” (19).
    9
      More than two centuries before the solution of the problem of longitude.
         Sonft'e (if Groqraphie .                                                                                                  Dccem&rr i8S5.
                                                                                                                                                  35:
    F1                                                                                                                                              WSF




    A
                                                                                                                                                                 C




B
                                                                                                                                                                 D




El                                                                                                                                                                1
                                                                                                                                                                 E




 1
F
                                                                                                                                                                 F1
    (•run    , /irx Erfinrtl , ft . Jt
         *                               Jtuyuay Trouw
                                                                                                         frnp . (in.mn . ft .   4tUnine   A< Av.< tf, Pnr-xj .
                                                         Figure 58. The Hadji Ahmed World Map of 1559
                                                                                                     .
                                                   THE    ANTARCTIC MAPS         101




                   Figure 59. Modern map of Behring Strait.

can see the prime meridian on this map, running from the North to the South
Poles, and passing near the coast of Africa . The other meridians are all spaced ten
degrees apart, as are the parallels of latitude from pole to pole. The prime meridian
on this map appears to coincide closely with the 20 th meridian of West Longitude
on modern maps . Thus, to find the longitude of any place, we will start with this
line as 20° West and count by tens, adding West Longitude westward and sub-
tracting it eastward . In Table 3 I have listed a number of places and compared
their positions on this map and on modern maps . Table 3 is in two parts; the first
part deals with places that are fairly close to, and the second part with places that
are far from , the prime meridian . Note that both latitude and longitude are sur -
prisingly accurate for places near the meridian , the accuracy of longitude being
especially noteworthy. But that accuracy declines rapidly with distance from the
meridian.
     This increased inaccuracy with distance from the prime meridian indicates
an error in the projection , but not necessarily an error in the drawing of the coasts
that seem too far off . It may merely be another case of imposing a projection on
a map that was originally drawn on an entirely different projection .
     Some of the apparent exaggerations of the size of Antarctica on the map of
Hadji Ahmed can , of course, be attributed to the same error we found on the
Oronteus Finaeus Map, namely the confusion of the 80th parallel of latitude with
the Antarctic Circle. But even considering this, the continent on this map seems
too large, and its shape is hardly recognizable.
102 Maps of the Ancient Sea Kings
     To understand the cause of the extreme distortion of the map, let us consider
the polar regions on any Mercator map. It is difficult to find a modern Mercator
world map showing Antarctica , but anyone who has seen a Mercator world map
cannot have failed to notice how the projection exaggerates the northern polar
regions. On such maps Greenland , for example, appears to be about the size of
South America . This results from the fact that on this projection the meridians
are parallel straight lines that never meet . The whole line across the top or bottom
of such a map represents the pole, and the geography is distorted accordingly.
     What I am suggesting is that some of the ancient source maps of Antarctica
may have been drawn on a projection resembling the Mercator at least in this
respect of having straight meridians parallel to each other. Such a projection
existed in Greek times and was, according to Ptolemy, the projection used by
Marinus of Tyre ( 39:69). If ancient source maps survived on two different projec-
       —
tions some on a circular projection such as we have apparently found on the
Oronteus Finaeus Map and some on a straight -meridian projection like that of
                                 —
Marinus of Tyre or Mercator the appearance of this map would be readily
explained .

                        3. Mercator’s maps of the Antarctic.

     Gerhard Kroner, known as Mercator, is the most famous cartographer of the
16 th Century.10 There is even a tendency to date the beginning of scientific car-
tography from him . Nonetheless, there never was a cartographer more interested
in the ancients, more indefatigable in searching out ancient maps, or more re-
spectful of the learning of the long ago.
     I think it is safe to say that Mercator would not have included the Oronteus
Finaeus Map of Antarctica in his Atlas if he disbelieved in the existence of that
continent. He was not publishing a book of science fiction . But we have further
reason to know he believed in its existence: He shows Antarctica on maps he drew
himself . One of his maps of the Antarctic appears on Sheet 9 of the 1569 Atlas.
(See Fig. 60.) At first glance I could see little relationship between this Mercator
Map and that of Oronteus Finaeus, and I had little reason to suspect that it could
be a good map of the Antarctic coast. But careful study showed that a number
of points could be clearly identified (see Fig. 61 ). Among these were Cape Dart
and Cape Herlacher in Marie Byrd Land , the Amundsen Sea, Thurston Island in
Ellsworth Land , the Fletcher Islands in the Bellingshausen Sea , Alexander I Island,
the Antarctic ( Palmer ) Peninsula, the Weddell Sea , Cape Norvegia, the Regula
Range in Queen Maud Land (as islands), the Muhlig-Hofmann Mountains (as
islands), the Prince Harald Coast, the Shirase Glacier (as an estuary ) on Prince
Harald Coast, Padda Island in Lutzow-Holm Bay, and the Prince Olaf Coast in

  10
       For a short biography of Mercator, see Note 15.
             Figure 60. Mercator ’ s Map of the Antarctic ( 1569).

       °
     100 W     °
             80 W       °
                     60 W       °
                              40 W      °
                                      20 W      0°




Figure 61. Mercator ’ s Map of the Antarctic: tracing, with straight meridians
             according to Mercator’ s Projection. See Table 4.
104        Maps of the Ancient Sea Kings
Enderby Land. In some cases these features are more distinctly recognizable than
on the Oronteus Finaeus Map, and it seems clear, in general, that Mercator had
at his disposal source maps other than those used by Oronteus Finaeus.
     The projection on Mercator’s map of Antarctica is the one that is named
after him . It has straight meridians that run parallel from pole to pole, and these,
of course, enlarge the polar regions very much , as already explained.
      I thought at first that Mercator might have drawn his map of Antarctica to
fit his projection; in which case its large size might be thus explained without
recourse to any other considerations. To test this, I traced the map and drew
parallel meridians on it at ten -degree intervals, converting his longitude figures
into East and West Greenwich Longitude ( Fig. 61 ). Mercator, accepting the car-
tographical convention of his time, counted 360 degrees from a meridian off the
west coast of Africa , approximately in what we now call 23° West Longitude. This
is indicated on his world map of 1538, which also shows the Antarctic ( Figs . 63, 64) .n
      In order to correlate his system with ours, it is necessary to find a point
common to both . I picked the meridian of Alexandria as this common point
because I saw that Mercator’s 60 th meridian12 passed through Alexandria, which ,
in our system , is the 30th meridian of East Longitude. Thus his 30 th meridian ,
we might suppose, should be equivalent to our zero meridian ( the meridian
of Greenwich ). To convert his longitude to our system , accordingly, it seemed
that we should merely have to subtract 30 ° going eastward . His zero meridian and
his 360 th meridian coincided , and should be, according to this, equivalent to our
meridian of 30° West. But, as we have seen , this is not the case. His zero / 360 th
meridian actually coincides fairly closely with our meridian of 23° West . The dis-
crepancy amounts to about 7°.
     I should perhaps explain at this point that the exact location of Mercator’s
zero/ 360 th meridian depends on the accuracy of his placing of the Cape Verde
Islands, the Canary Islands, and the Azores in longitude. He has his zero meridian
running through the easternmost of the Cape Verde Islands, missing the western-
most Canaries by a degree and a half , and passing through the easternmost Azores,
so that he has the easternmost islands of the Cape Verdes and of the Azores on
the same meridian . But they are actually not on the same meridian . For this
reason I thought it best to take a definite point, like Alexandria , as a common point
for converting his system into ours. However, we have just seen that this will not
precisely do, either. There is a discrepancy.
     What is the matter? This brings up a most important point . Mercator is
rightly regarded as a great cartographer . We forget that he had to work within
the limitations of his age. Since he did not know the true circumference of the

       Mallery maintained that this map of Mercator must have been based on an
      11

authentic ancient source map (131).
    12 On his
              world map of 1538.
                                                        THE   ANTARCTIC MAPS 105
earth, he had to take the best guess going. We have seen that when we start count-
ing degrees from Alexandria by his system and by our own we do not end up in
the same place. We find ourselves 7° too far west . On the other hand , if we start
counting from our 23rd meridian , converting that to Mercator’s zero meridian , we
are going to find Alexandria at 370 East Longitude, 7° too far east. The actual
longitude difference between the meridian of 23° West and Alexandria is 53°.
A simple calculation shows that 7° is 13 per cent of the longitude difference. So
Mercator used a circumference of the earth 13 per cent too short.
      With regard to Mercator’s 1569 map, my first step was to pick a reference
point for longitude. It seemed to me that our zero meridian , which intersects the
Queen Maud Land Coast between the Regula Range and the Muhlig-Hofmann
Mountains, might be a good point to start with , experimentally . I took no account
of the difference in the length of the degree, but drew my meridians the same
distance apart as Mercator did , numbering them after our modern system . The
errors in the longitudes thus found for the various points convinced me that
Mercator had not redrawn his source map; apparently he had simply taken a map
constructed on quite a different projection and transferred it bodily to his own
map.
      I conjectured that the original projection may have been a polar type of pro-
 jection with straight meridians. In this case the parallels of latitude would be
circles. To test the matter, I listed the identifiable points on the map with their
latitudes. As the reader can see ( Fig. 61 ), the localities are distributed in a semi-
circle. They are, nevertheless, closely in the same latitudes, averaging about 70°
South, as this list shows:

                     Cape Dart                            ...     73.5 S
                     Cape Herlacher                       ...     74.0 S
                     Amundsen Sea                         ...     72.0 S
                     Thurston Island                              72.0 S
                     Fletcher Island                      ...     73.0 S
                     Alexander I Island                   ...     69-73 S
                     Bellingshausen Sea                   ...     71.0 S
                     Antarctic Peninsula (truncated )     ...     70.0 S
                     Weddell Sea                          ...     72.0 S
                     Cape Norvegia                        ...     71.0 S
                     Regula Range                         ...     72.0 S
                           —
                     Muhlig Hofmann Mts
                     Prince Harold Coast
                                                              .   71-73 S
                                                                   -
                                                                  69 70 S
                     Shirase Glacier                      ...     70.0 S
                     Padda Island                         ...     69.0 S
                     Casey Bay                            ...     67.5 S
                     Edward VIII Bay                      ...     67.0 S

     The indication is that the parallels of latitude on this map were originally
circles. I found it possible with a pair of compasses to draw a circle that would
pass close to all of them . A series of experiments finally located a point for the
        106     Maps of the Ancient Sea Kings
        South Pole that gave me a satisfactory parallel of 70° South Latitude, with respect
        to most of the localities. Having the pole and the 70th parallel, it was a simple
        matter to find the length of the degree of latitude and then measure out the 80th ,
        75th. 70th, and 65th parallels. We could then check the latitudes and longitudes
        of the various points as shown in Table 4; we found our grid fairly well confirmed
        ( Fig. 62) .
                                                         10°        0°   10 °
                                                   20°                          20 °
                                             30°                                       30 °

                               45° W                                            12              45° E
                                                     9          0 1                       14
                                         7
                                                               • •ft
                                                                ©

                                              8                 O                         Q
                           6 0Y 6                                                               14~\ 600
                                                                                              15'
                                                                                13
                      70°      / ;X  *                                                                  70 °

                  80°                                                                                      80°
                                00
                      4
90° W                                                                                                            90° E
         H 2r         3
                                                         SOUTH POLE




                                                           80° S


                                                           75° S
                          iT

                                                           70° S

                                                               180° E /W

                  .
        Figure 62 Mercator’s Map of the Antarctic: tracing, with superimposed polar
                                projection. See Table 4.


             These findings indicate that Mercator had a real map of the Antarctic, though
        he was unable to transfer the points on it to his own projection . The errors of
        longitude are less than they seem, since, as we have already mentioned, the degree
        of longitude is very short at the high latitudes of Antarctica .
             Earlier, in 1538, Mercator drew a world map that also showed Antarctica ,
        as we have seen. The similarity to the map of Oronteus Finaeus is obvious, but
        there are important differences. Mercator has the Antarctic Circle inside the
        continent, as Oronteus Finaeus does, but not at the same distance from the pole.
        In other words, Mercator seems to have changed the scale. On the Oronteus
        Finaeus Map, as we have seen, the so-called Circulus Antarcticus seemed to be a
        mistaken interpretation of the 80th parallel of the source map, as confirmed by
                                                     THE   ANTARCTIC MAPS 107

the agreement of the geography with the grid drawn on that assumption. By
shifting this, Mercator destroyed the original scale. Therefore, it is impossible for
us to reconstruct a grid of latitudes on this map, as we did for the other map.
Longitudes, however, are remarkably accurate (Table 5).
     It seems that Mercator made constant use of ancient source maps available
to him. What eventually happened to these maps we do not know, but we are able
to distinguish , in a number of cases at least, where he depended on them and
where he was influenced by contemporary explorations.
      For the Antarctic, of course, he had to depend on the ancient sources.1* The
source maps here may have come to him through Oronteus Finaeus, who may have
found them in the library of the Paris Academy of Sciences, now part of the
Biblioth £que Nationale; or he may have had others of his own . For Greenland he
used the Zeno Map of the North , with the mountain ranges conventionalized.
So far as his 1569 map of South America is concerned ( Fig. 41), a number of
interesting points emerge.
      First, with regard to the northern coast, it is clear that he depended on ancient
maps as well as modem explorations. He has the Amazon misplaced with regard
to the equator, just as it appears on the Piri Re’is Map, but the course of the
Amazon is conventionalized with a number of snakelike meanders. The Island of
Marajo, correctly delineated on the equator of the mathematical projection of the
Piri Re’is Map, is here confused with the Island of Trinidad, off the mouth of
the Orinoco. Trinidad is therefore shown as much too large. The southeast coast of
South America , from the Tropic of Capricorn to the Horn, is very badly drawn ,
evidently from the accounts of the explorers, while the west coast is completely
out of shape.
      Oddly enough , in his map of 1538, thirty years earlier, Mercator had repre-
sented the west coast of South America much more correctly ( Fig. 63). How is this
explained ? I suggest that in his first map he depended on the ancient sources, while
on his map of 1569 he depended on the modern explorers, who, since they could
find no accurate longitude, could merely guess at the trends of coasts.




     18
          Since the very continent was not “discovered” until 250 years later.
                                                                -*
                                                                      I
                                                           hu v 4ci orb m
                                                                           .as
                                                                        *
                                                ^^
                                                ti
                                                ^ xx
                                                       pojhr ori ,iti Cftini
                                                            *
                                                                      rflt A
                                                       \ tuUa trfUntur . P O }
                                                       orb m fU tsmtHjfv
                                                           *
                                                                          '
                                                       nbm di uX ripe
                                                                ^          *
                                                                            c
                                                                          V«k




Figure 63 . Mercator’ s World Map of 1538   .
m Itfbr ( tuUde tZ vf
7rtm  IJS qu( h4 ftn
if 4 SarnuUuufr AX

            -
mm Ztp*rt*u)r%i
'




rimtrpi I pa ru uii3
          rMbm*
       * bnWnfi
i
W
                                                          MERCATOF


                                                    °w
                                            l0° » io
             1
                                                     -
                                                 20r ? w          —-
                                                              =
                                                         30° 6° E       -
                                          25
V   .
                                                                   =
                                                               40° 1


                                                                   5C
                                  24
                 15
                      2           23
             1

                          6
        13                             26

                                                         27
                                                         28



         12,
                                                                  101
                                  8

                              9
                                                                  11(

                                                                    h
                                                                  12C


                                                                  130


                                                              140°= c




                                               160°=r I 10° £

                                       170°^ J i 8 0 r
                                                         -
                                                              _
 IRST     MERID[ /\N




'= 54° E
I-
 52° E


= 70° E


= 78° E


 86° E




                 Figure 64 . Mercator ’s World Map of 1538, converted to Greenwich Longitude.
                                                  See Table 5 .
    c
( CHAP YVL
 TER V \V
ANCIENT \\
MAPS OF ®
        1
THE EAST /
  AND   m
vWEST   Ml
                The Dulcert Portolano of 1339. The De Canerio
                Map of 1502. A Venetian Chart of 1484. The
                Mathematical Basis of these Three Charts. The
                Twelve- Wind System in the Venetian Chart,
                reflected also in the De Canestris Map of
                1335 —37. The earliest Portuguese Chart of the
                Indian Ocean, and the discovery that it shows
                Australia. A Twelfth Century Map of China.

                     We have already noted that Nordenskiold in his essay on the
                portolan charts stated that they were too accurate to have origi-
                nated in the Middle Ages. He found evidence that they probably
                existed in classical times, alongside the inferior maps of Eratos-
                thenes, Pomponius Mela , and Ptolemy. He even hinted that
                he thought they were of Carthaginian origin. It is our purpose
                now to examine a number of these charts, to see how accurate
                they really are, and how far they may be related to a possible
                worldwide system of sophisticated maps deriving from pre-Greek
                times.
                               1. The Dulcert Portolano of 1339.
                     The Dulcert Portolano of 1339 is an early version of the
                                    —
                 “normal portolano” the highly accurate map that appeared sud -
                 denly in Europe in the early 14th Century, seemingly from no-
                 where. This kind of map did not evolve further but was simply
copied and recopied during the rest of the Middle Ages and during the Renais-
sance (see Fig. 3).
     In Figure 65 I have worked out the grid of this map. I began with the assump-
tion that the grid would be a square grid. I identified a number of geographical
points around the map and from these discovered how much latitude and longitude
was covered by the map. Dividing the number of degrees into the millimeters of
the draft map, I found the length of the degree. It did appear that there was a
square grid.
                                                                                                                                      '
                                                                                                                                      '    *        '
                                                                                                                                                    X
                                                                                                                                                            ;
                                                                                                                                                            /
                                                                                                                                                                X



                                                                          )                                                                                                 »

                                                            ,
                                                            N
                                                                      /                                                                        I                        C
                                                                  /                                                                            I

                                                                                                                                           /
 60° N                                                            k/                                                                                                                                        3
                                                                                   / “\wf                                                 5 ~*
                                                                                                                                          er
                                                                               V
                                                                                                                                                                                                            K
                                                                                   ^                                                                                                         *n      o:     Q:
                                Cy       o                                                                                       (
                                                                                                                                                                                                     o /o
                                              o                                                          /                                         «A       \ »
                                                                                                                                 ii
                   0                     o
                                                                                                                                               ff / Ly ' >
                            i                 4                   5                          i
                                                                                                 /
                                                                                                     /
                                                                                                                             /
                                                                                                                                 I
                                                                                                                                               y           so                                    .
                                                                                                                                                                                                     LxJ
                                                                                                                                                                                                     3
                                                                                                                                                                                                           o
                                         o
                                                                                             /
                                                                                             i                       /0
                                                                                                                     /
                                                                                                                         /                                              V


                                                                                                                                                                                        i
                                                                                                                                                                                             >*
                                                                                                                                                                                                     cr    £
 55° N                                                                                     i                     /
                                                                                                                                                                                         »                 CD
                                                  A                   9
                                                                                       I
                                                                                       I
                                                                                           i
                                                                                                             L/                                    X                                    i




           o           bj                                                              I



                                                                          10

 50° N                f.3
                      «•    o
                                     —•
                                     *
                                     8
                                         t
                                          #




                                                      vJ. 11
                                                         •i
                                                                              12                                                                                    s


                            o

                                                   13                                                                                                                                                       *
                                                         15
                                                  14'
 45° N                                                                                                                               27
                                                        16 *  .                                                                                                     o

                                                                                                                                                                '
                 17
                                                                                                                                                   0                            M
                                                                                                                                                                                    .
                                                                                                                                                                                    0

 40° N

                                                                                       ^
                                                                                              *a
                                                                                            O26              k
                                                                                                             -                                          29
                                                                                                                                                                                                           H
                                                                                                                                                                                                            3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    -
                                                                                                                                                        ©
                                                                              25                                                                                                                     <
                                                                                                                                                                                                     Q
 35° N                                                                                                                                                                                               cc
                                                                                                                                                                                                     LxJ


                                                                                                                                                                                                     LU

                                                                                                                                                                                                     or
                                                                                                                                                                                                     a.
        o 22
30° N
                                                                                            SETS LATITUDE
                                     LLl
                                     Q



a- °
  24
 25 N
           23
           1
                                     CD
                                     o
                                     co
                                     c
                                     CO




 20° N


                                                                                                                                                                                                                    •
               10° W                       5° W                   0° E W                                                     5° E                               10° E                    15° E
                                                                                                                                                                                                                /




               Figure 65. The Dulcert Portolano, with a grid of line of latitude and longitude
                        constructed empirically from the geography. See Table 6a.
        X
        \
         \
            .
            k


                A
                /
                             —      X
                                    \
                                        X
                                         J




                                             X
                                                 X
                                                                                                              x
                                                                                                                  \
                                                                                                                               X


                                                 '       x
            /
            /                                                '
                                                             x
                                                                         x
        /
                                                                                                              -v
                                                                                                              %
                                                                                                                          ,




                                                                                                                                                                                 41
    +
                                                                                                                                                               40


                                                                                                                                                                                 )




                                                                                                                                                      42
                                                                                                                                                  /
                                                                                                                                              /

                                                                                                                                      /
                                                                                                                                          f
                                                                                                                                  /

                                                                                                                           f




                                                                                                                                                      K
                                                                                                                                                      i\

                                                                                                                                                      \i
                                                                                                                                                       *
                                                                                                                       '
                                                                                                                                                                                     rv
                                    47
                                                                                                                                                                                 <; S
                                                                                                                                                                                      i
                                                                                                                                                                                 /
                                                                                                                                                           \                    *     *
2
                                                                                                                  I
                                                                                                                  l
                                                                                                                  I
                                                                                                                  v
                                                                                                                      s
                                                                                                                                                                \
                                                                                                                                                                            /




                                                                                                                                                                            V
                                                                                                                                                                                fS
                                                                                                                      \
                                                                                                                       \
                                                                                                                              X
                                                                                                                                  X


                                                                 »
                                             48                                  I
                                                                                     I

                                                                                     \
                                                     i   *                               \


                                                 i
                                                     I
                                                     /               I                   \   \
                                                 I                   \                       \
                                                                         \                       \
                                                 /
                                             I
                                                                             \
                                                                             \
                                                                             \
                                                                                                     \\
                                                     i                           }                        \


                                                                                                                                                                x   50
                                                                                                                                                                     i

E                   25° E   30° E                                35° E                                                40° E                                         45° E
116    Maps of the Ancient Sea Kings
      It was necessary to lay out this grid from some definite point . For a first ex-
periment I selected Cape Bon , in Tunisia , close to the ancient site of Carthage.
I was influenced here by the idea that perhaps this map had been drawn in ancient
times by the Carthaginians, using Carthage as a center. I drew my first grid on
the assumption that the vertical line (or prime meridian ) through the center of
the portolan projection was drawn on True North (see Fig. 3). The resulting table
revealed errors that indicated that the map was not oriented to True North ,
but about 6° to the east . It appeared that 6° was probably just about the amount
of the compass declination in the Mediterranean at that time.1 A grid drawn
on this basis, however, revealed yet further errors, which seemed to indicate that
Alexandria , not Cape Bon, might be a better reference center for the map.
A new grid, based on Alexandria, proved to be very satisfactory with respect to
latitude, but about 2 ° off with respect to longitude. A final grid was drawn with
latitude based on the parallel of Alexandria , and longitude based on the meridian
of Gibraltar, and this proved extremely satisfactory (see Table 6).
      The grid applied to this portolano reveals some very interesting facts. First,
it appears that the geographical information contained in the chart is much greater
than can reasonably be expected from medieval sailors and cartographers. The map
falls into three parts : a very accurate map of the Mediterranean and Black Sea
regions and of the coasts of Europe as far north as the Hebrides; a very inaccurate
map of the Baltic region ; and a very inaccurate map of the eastern regions, em-
bracing the Persian Gulf and the Indian Ocean . It seemed that the inaccurate
parts of the map were simply tacked onto the portolano proper. They would seem
to reflect the true state of medieval geographical knowledge. The portolano proper,
on the other hand , is a remarkably scientific work . It is evident from the table,
for example, that the latitudes of all places, except perhaps for the Black Sea
region , are too accurate to have been determined by medieval sailors. The remark-
able degree of accuracy as to latitude extends all the way from the northern tip
of Ireland to the Sinai Peninsula and to Assam in southern Egypt.
      The accuracy of longitude is far more remarkable. The total longitude of the
 Mediterranean and Black Seas is correct to within half a degree on this grid.
That means that the mapmaker achieved highly scientific accuracy in finding the
 ratio of latitude to longitude. He could only have done this if he had had precise
information on the relative longitudes of a great many places scattered all the
 way from Galway in Ireland to the eastern bend of the Don in Russia . Norden -
skiold would seem to have been clearly right when he said that no medieval map-
 maker could have drawn this map. Not even Mercator in the 16th Century could
 have done so.
      Another point calls for mention . How could it have been possible to draw so

      Compass declination in the Mediterranean was 6° E in 1599 (89:14) and
6.1 ° in 1296 ( 50 ). It may have remained about the same in the intervening period.
                             ANCIENT MAPS       OF THE     EAST   AND   WEST 117
accurate a map of the vast region covered by the Dulcert Portolano (one thousand
miles north and south, almost three thousand miles east and west ) without the aid
of trigonometry? Let us remember that the mapmaker’s problem was to transfer
points on the spherical surface of the earth to a flat plane in such a way as to pre-
serve correct distances and land shapes. For this, the curvature had to be calculated
and transferred to a plane by trigonometry.2 That this probably was done for the
Dulcert Portolano will be shown a little later.
     In conclusion , we may remark that, since the Dulcert Portolano represents
essentially Nordenskiold ’s “ normal portolano,” we have evidence here that all the
portolanos stemmed from a common origin in remote times.

                           2. The De Canerio Map of 1502.

      The complete Piri Re’is Map, before it was torn in two, had included the
whole continent of Africa as well as Asia . In view of this, and in view of the
probability that other copies or versions of the source map Piri Re’is used for
Africa (or that were used by the Alexandrian compilers ) might have survived , we
continued a search for a map of Africa drawn on the same projection . We finally
found what we thought was such a map.
      My first glance at the De Canerio Map of 1502 (see Fig. 66) gave me a
feeling that our search had been successful. The South African part ( from the
equator southward ) looked astonishingly modern . I felt fairly confident that this
was an authentic ancient map in Renaissance dress.
      The abundance of easily identifiable points on the coasts made it easy to
work out the scale and construct an empirical grid , and their positions with refer-
ence to the grid indicated that the mapmaker had achieved considerable accuracy
in both latitude and longitude. The errors of latitude averaged only 1.6° and those
of longitude only 1.4°. We thought it remarkable that longitudes seemed more
accurate than latitudes.
      For some time it was not possible either to connect the map directly with the
Piri Re’is Projection , or to solve the mathematical structure that, I still confidently
felt, underlay it. Finally, the discovery of the magnetic orientation of the Dulcert
Portolano furnished the key.
      In the center of Africa , there appears a very large wind rose, obviously the
center of the portolan design . It had not appeared to me to lie on any significant
parallel or meridian , and I had therefore been unable to link it up with the pro-
 jection of the Piri Re’is Map until it occurred to me to find out whether this map
was oriented to Magnetic North . Experiment indicated that the map was, in fact,
oriented about ll 1/ 0 east of north. It was a simple matter to rotate the map,
                       ^
on its center, westward to True North. Figure 67 shows how this was done and

     2
         See Note 7.
118 Maps of the Ancient Sea Kings




     s r&                               A
             A

        >                                               /



                                            _               1
                                            \




             , i*                       *X r
                          r iI i L
                 r        •
                                                                                S '-r ',1
                                i




     '       '        &
                     rV
                                                                                 i
                     /
                                                                                     \


                                                                                         \

     K   -
             V

                     *    I \                                                                v




 :                                  %




                                        .   ^   v   *


                                                    »




                                                         " rv*’    y x . di M
                                           * T t ' JL Z 3       7
                                                                           *
                         Figure 66. The Nicolo De Canerio World Map of 1502.
                                                ANCIENT MAPS                                                 OF THE                       EAST      AND    WEST 119
70°                                                                                                                                                                        70°
                                                                                                                                      i
65°                                                                                                                                  i                                     65°
                                    c,   <\ ?                                                                                        I
                                                                                                                                                                           60°
60°                                 sy
                      t   V                                                                   33                                 I
55°                       30                                                                                                                                               55°
                                                                                                                                     B
                                                                                                                             r
50°                  29                                                                                                  7                                                 50°
                               28                                                                                        /
45°                                                                                                                                                                        45°
                     27         \
40°

35°
                  26
                          14
                                    \
                                    /
                                                r 2b
                                                  15.
                                                        '

                                                                        24
                                                                                             20
                                                                                                     ^       L2
                                                                                                                     ^
                                                                                                                     /
                                                                                                                         23
                                                                                                                                                                           40°

                                                                                                                                                                           35°

30°

25°
       12
            Tp   -7                         \
                                                \
                                                    \
                                                        \
                                                                        16   .                    17
                                                                                                         18 I
                                                                                                            L
                                                                                                             I
                                                                                                                 /
                                                                                                                                                                           30°

                                                                                                                                                                           25°
                                                            \
20°                                                             V                                                                                                          20°
                                                                    s                                                                                                37
                                                                    \
15                                                                       \                                                                                                 15°
                                                                                             /
10                                                                               x         l                                               re                              10°

 5° N
            10
                 k>
                     9         8
                                                                                   \

                                                                                     \
                                                                                         7
                                                                                       \ i
                                                                                           /
                                                                                                                                                5
                                                                                                                                                o
                                                                                                                                                                            5° N
                                                                                                                                                              ,
 0°
                                           60       1       ]
                                                                                                 -
                                                                                                  *  I
                                                                                                         C                                                It 36 <2          0°
 -
 3
     O o
      S                                      5      r                                           7                                                                           5° S
                          5.5° W                                                                /
10°                                                                                           7                                                                            10°
                                                            4                                 /
15°                                                                                          +                                                                             15°

20°                                                                                                                                                                        20°
                                                3                                        /
25°                                                                                      t                                                                                 25°
                                                                                         I                       34
30°                                                                                  I                                                                                     30°

35°
                                                                                 I                                                                                         35°
                                                            2
                                                                1
40°                                                                                                                                                                        40°
           20°       10° W           0°         10° E                    20°                         30°             40°                  50°       60°     70°      80°

Figure 67. The De Canerio World Map of 1502, with an oblong grid constructed
                 by spherical trigonometry See Table 7.                                                      .
120    Maps of the Ancient Sea Kings
how, with this shift, the center of the map turned out to lie on the equator and
on the meridian of Alexandria !
                                                                                 —
      This was an extraordinary discovery. It constituted as good proof as might
be necessary to establish the Alexandrian derivation of the map. It demonstrated ,
too, that the original map had been drawn on True North, and that the magnetic
orientation was probably introduced by De Canerio or some other geographer of
the relatively modern period . Why that geographer gave the map an orientation
more than twice too far to the east is difficult to imagine. It would , of course, have
rendered all compass courses hopelessly wrong . The same error appears in numer-
ous other portolanos.
      Now that the exact center of the map had apparently been established , it
occurred to me that it might be possible to solve its mathematical structure and
to construct a grid based on trigonometry.
      This proved easier than I had expected . A number of minor projection points
appeared at equal intervals on the map, obviously arranged on the perimeter of
the circle of the portolan projection . The trigonometric solution would depend
on finding the exact length of the radius of the circle. For this all that was needed
was the exact position of one of these minor projection points in latitude and
longitude. Fortunately, one of these points lay just off Land’s End , England , as
near as we could estimate in Latitude 50° North and Longitude 5.5° West. We
now had the two co-ordinates necessary for a trigonometric calculation.
      From our experience with the Piri Re’is Map, we assumed at first that plane
trigonometry would be involved , and found the length of the radius to be about
61.3°. This gave us the latitudes of the two projection points located on the
perimeter, where the latter was intersected by the prime meridian , and we thus
obtained the length of the degree of latitude. Since we had not then discovered the
oblong grid of the Piri Re’is Map, we assumed that the lengths of the degrees of
latitude and longitude would be the same, and drew a square grid for the map.
Some remarkable facts now emerged .
      The most sensational development was what the grid revealed in the Medi-
terranean and Black Seas. It was obvious, by comparison with the Dulcert chart ,
that the De Canerio Map was based on the “ normal portolano,” though it did not
show such fine detail. This was natural enough , considering the much vaster area
covered . This part of the De Canerio Map, however , was evidently an integral part
of the map of Africa ; it had not been just tacked on . It would seem that it had
been drawn originally on the same trigonometric projection . This is shown by
what follows.
       A table of thirty-seven geographical points, as found by our square grid , re-
vealed the extraordinary accuracy of the map as to latitude and longitude. We
found , for example, that the average error in the latitudes of eleven places ( Gibral -
 tar, the northern coasts of Sardinia , Sicily, Cyprus, and Crete; Cape Bon , Bengazi ,
 Lesbos, the Bosphorus, Sevastopol, and Batum ) was only one half of one degree.
                            ANCIENT MAPS        OF THE     EAST   AND   WEST 121
The longitudinal distance between Gibraltar and Batum was correct, proportion -
ate to the latitude, suggesting that there may have been no considerable error
in the original source map, as to the size of the earth . It seemed that the trigo-
nometric solution of the De Canerio Map carried with it the implication that
trigonometry underlay the normal portolano and , in fact, the whole group of
portolan charts.3
     The other parts of the De Canerio Map were not as accurate as the Medi-
terranean and Black Sea areas. The eastern section ( including the upper part of
the African coast of the Indian Ocean and Arabia ) was evidently plastered onto
the accurate source map by De Canerio or somebody else. It did not fit the grid ,
and it seemed to have been derived from Ptolemy. Another section in the far
north , covering the Baltic, also appeared to have been originally a separate source
map which at some time had been incorrectly compiled with the principal part
of the map.
     Other errors appeared within the limits of the trigonometric chart itself .
Points on the west coast of Africa from the Cape of Good Hope to the delta of
the Niger averaged about 4° too far south . Points from Freetown to Gibraltar
averaged about 3.6° too far north . The total latitude error from the Cape of Good
Hope to Gibraltar was 5.5°, implying an error in the length of the degree of
latitude of about 8 per cent. Latitude errors continued to increase northward on
the coasts of Europe as far as northern Ireland .
     At first I supposed this might imply an error in the scale of the source map,
but corresponding longitude errors were not found . An error in scale would carry
with it proportional errors in both latitude and longitude. There were larger longi-
tude errors, it is true, along the African and European coasts than in the Medi-
terranean , but they did not suggest an error in the length of the degree of longi-
tude. From the Cape of Good Hope to Walvis Bay, on the west coast, the average
error was 3.5° West. From the Congo to Cape Three Points it was 3.5° East.
From Cape Palmas to Gibraltar longitude errors were negligible. On the European
coasts, from Cape St. Vincent to Londonderry, they averaged 3.5° East. There was
no indication here of any error in scale, and , in view of the distribution of latitude
errors in the Mediterranean , very little suggestion of any error in the orientation of
the continent. We did, however, change the orientation later, making the shift from
the magnetic orientation 12° instead of 11 *4 °.
      The apparent increase of latitude errors with distance from the equator gained
     3
      An exception must be made for the earliest of the maps called portolanos,
the Carta Pisana. This apparently dates from the 13th Century. In this case the
typical portolan design was applied to an extremely inferior map, such as might
have been drawn in the Middle Ages or very sloppily copied from an accurate
portolano. The latter supposition is supported by the fact that the mapmaker
made a botch of the portolan design. This consisted of two circles, but the map
maker made them of different diameters, and hardly a line in the design is straight.
122 Maps of the Ancient Sea Kings
added significance with our discovery of the oblong grid on the Piri Re’is Map.
If no error in scale was responsible, perhaps it was a question of an original pro-
jection that might have taken account of the curvature of the earth by spreading
the parallels with distance from the equator, as in the modern Mercator Projec-
tion . Hints were found, although not confirmed , of a possible knowledge of the
principle of the Mercator Projection in medieval Europe and in ancient China .
Accordingly, we decided to find out whether there could be any truth in this.
Charles Halgren , of the Caru Studios, was kind enough to construct a Mercator
grid for the map, and this was then examined by William Briesemeister. Unfor-
tunately, it turned out that there was very little basis for supposing that the origi-
nal source map had been drawn on anything resembling Mercator’s projection.
      We now came back to the point from which we had started : the question of
the alternatives of plane versus spherical trigonometry. I decided to draw a grid
based on spherical trigonometry to see whether that would solve our problem .
                         —
Three different persons Richard Strachan , Professor E . A. Wixson , of the De-
partment of Mathematics of Keene State College; and Dr. J . M. Frankland , of the
                     —
Bureau of Standards independently used spherical trigonometry to calculate the
length of the degree, and agreed on essentially the same result : 58.5° for the radius
of the projection . The diagram in Figure 67 shows that, by this calculation , the
degrees of latitude and longitude d i f f e r and that, as a result, we have an oblong
grid , as we found empirically to be the case with the Piri Re’is Map. This grid ,
based on spherical trigonometry, solved our problem of latitude errors, as can be
seen by an examination of Table 7. The following paragraphs summarize the
general results :
      1. Longitude in the Mediterranean and Black Seas: The average of the errors
of longitude of twelve places from Gibraltar ( 5.5° W ) to Batum (42° E ) is
about one-fifth of a degree or about 12 miles. Over a total longitudinal distance
of 47 *4 ° (about 3,000 miles) between Gibraltar and Batum , we find an error of
only 1 °, equal to about 2 per cent of the distance.
      2. Latitude on the Atlantic Coasts : From the Cape of Good Hope ( 35.5° S)
to Londonderry, Ireland ( 55° N ), over a total latitude distance of 90 y2° , the
error is 1 °, about 1 per cent of the distance. There are larger latitude errors at
many points in between , but these may represent distortions of local geography
introduced by careless copyists. The accuracy of longitude east and west in the
Mediterranean , and of latitude north and south in the Atlantic, suggests the basic
accuracy of the grid based on spherical trigonometry.
      3. Latitudes in the Mediterranean and Black Seas : There seems to be a reg-
ular error of about 3° applying to this whole area , which is thus placed too far
south . The relative latitudes of places, however, are good. Deviations from the
 regular, or standard, error of 3° average less than 1 °. It would seem probable that
the general error was introduced by the compilers who originally combined maps
of the Mediterranean and of the Atlantic coasts on the trigonometric projection .
                            ANCIENT MAPS       OF THE    EAST    AND   WEST 123
    These findings with regard to the De Canerio Map affect rather deeply our
views with regard to the Piri Re’is Map and other maps to be considered later.
It would now seem that the original source maps used by Piri Re’is for Africa and
Europe, and perhaps also for the American coasts, as well as all the portolanos,
may have been based on spherical trigonometry.

     The De Canerio Map of 1502, showing, as it does, both the Atlantic and the
Indian Ocean coasts of Africa, raises another problem, especially for those who
are anxious to attribute its origins to the Portuguese and other explorers of the
15th Century. An investigation of the history of the discovery of the African coast
in the century before the drawing of this map reveals no solid basis for believing
that the explorers could have drawn the map or even supplied cartographers at
home with the data necessary for drawing it.
     To begin with, it appears that by 1471, only thirty-one years before the map
was drawn by De Canerio, the Portuguese had not even reached the mouth of the
Niger, four degrees north of the equator on the west coast. The Portuguese scholar
Cortesao ( 54) says:

    . . . The whole of the Gulf of Guinea was discovered by the Portuguese dur-
ing the third quarter of the 15th Century, and Rio de Lago, where the present
Lagos, the capital of Nigeria, lies, not far from Ife, was reached for the first time
in 1471.   ...
     Lagos is in 6° North Latitude and 3.5° East Longitude, and there is 100 miles
or more of coast between Lagos and the mouth of the Niger. Boies Penrose, in his
scholarly account of the Age of Discovery, gives a chronology of the discovery of the
African coast and states that by 1474 the Portuguese had just reached Cape
St. Catharine, two degrees below the equator (162:43). It is plain from this that
only a quarter of a century before the De Canerio Map was compiled the Portu-
guese had not even begun the exploration of the west coast between the equator
and the Cape of Good Hope, to say nothing of exploring the eastern coast .
     To understand how impossible it would have been for Portuguese or other
western explorers to have accurately mapped these coasts, even if they had explored
them , we have only to understand that sea charts with graduated scales of degrees,
subdividing the multiples of them into equal smaller units, were not in use by
navigators until after 1496. Until then , therefore, even if the navigator could have
                 —                      —
found longitude which was impossible he could not have entered any notations
of longitude on the charts, and the same is true for latitude. Penrose describes
the state of nautical science just before 1502 in the following passage :

    King John [of Portugal ] was very interested . . . in cosmography and astron -
                                         —           —
omy, and he had a committee of experts the Junta headed by the brilliant Jews,
Joseph Vizinho and Abraham Zacuto, to work on the problem of finding position
124    Maps of the Ancient Sea Kings
at sea . Zacuto had written in Hebrew in the previous decade his Almanach Per-
petuum , the most advanced work yet to appear on the subject, and one containing
full tables of the sun’s declination . But its technical nature, coupled with the fact
that it was written in a language but little understood by the average skipper,
rendered it quite impractical . Vizinho, therefore, translated it into Latin (printed
at Leiria , 1496) and later made an abridged version. . . . One result of this tech -
nical research was the expedition of Vizinho in 1485 along the Guinea Coast as
far as Fernando Po, for the purpose of determining the declination of the sun [ the
Latitude] throughout Guinea . . . . The observations made by the Vizinho expe-
dition led to the introduction of graduated sailing charts into Portugal. . . .
(162 : 44-45)

     The story of the exploration of the coast from 1496 when graduated sailing
charts were introduced to 1502 gives no basis for supposing that the De Canerio
Map of 1502 resulted from it . An important explorer, Diogo Cao, discovered the
Congo, reaching a latitude of 13° S, and returned to Portugal in 1484 (162 : 45-47).
On his next voyage he explored the coast for nine degrees farther south and re-
turned to Portugal in 1487. This was five years before the drawing of the De
Canerio Map, and there were still about 800 miles of unexplored coast lying
between the point reached by Diogo Cao and the Cape of Good Hope.
     It is true, of course, that Bartholomew Diaz rounded the Cape of Good Hope
in 1488, but his was not a mapping expedition . He did not follow the coast down
to the Cape. Instead , just south of Caboda Volta ( Liideritz ) in 27° South Latitude,
he was blown off course and around the Cape, making his landfall 250 miles to
the East! He returned to Portugal in 1489 (162:47).
     After Diaz, the next expedition was that of da Gama , who left Portugal in
1497 and returned in 1499. This expedition may have carried graduated sailing
charts, for it was very carefully planned . Penrose says:

     Four ships were constructed under the supervision of Bartholomew Diaz. . . .
Bishop Diogo Ortiz supplied the fleet with maps and books, and Abraham Zacuto
provided astronomical instruments, and made tables of declination , and trained
the ships’ officers in the art of making observations. . . . (162 : 50)

     This fleet might have produced some accurate observations of latitude along
the coast, but this was not its purpose. Its destination was India. Therefore,
da Gama plotted his course to avoid the coast . He followed it a short way, and
then made for the Cape Verde Islands. From there he steered a “circular course
far out into mid -ocean to the southwest, to escape the doldrums and the currents
of the Gulf of Guinea ” (162: 51 ). He reached St . Helena, on November 8, 1497,
a few days later set to sea again , and rounded the Cape of Good Hope without
touching at any other port. His first landfall after rounding the Cape was at
Mossel Bay, 300 miles to the east of the Cape. He touched at a few other points
before heading out across the Indian Ocean to India , but the African coast was
                            ANCIENT MAPS        OF THE     EAST   AND    WEST 125
out of sight most of the time and therefore could not have been mapped . He
might have found the latitudes of his ports of call, but he could not, at any point,
have determined longitudes.
     We can conclude that neither da Gama , nor Diaz, nor any of their predeces-
sors, could have done the accurate mapping of the west and east coasts of Africa
that we find on the De Canerio Map.

                         3. The Venetian Chart of 1484.

      Among the most noteworthy of the portolan charts is one drawn , or at least
found , in Venice in 1484 (see Fig. 68) . This chart is remarkable for its accuracy
and because it was based both on trigonometry and the so-called “ twelve-wind
system ” knowrn to the ancients. In the last particular it appears to be unique
among the known portolan charts. We will consider these points in reverse order.
      The usual portolan design , with which the readers of this book have now
become familiar, is one in which the circle is bisected a number of times to make
angles at the center of 180°, 90°, 45°, 22 % °, and 11 */4 ° (and occasionally with
still another bisection into angles of half of 11 % ° ). This has already been ex-
plained (see Fig. 9) . There also was in antiquity the so-called “ twelve-wind
system .” My student, Alfred Isroe, who illustrated the eight-wind system , has also
illustrated the more sophisticated twelve-wind system ( Fig . 69). Instead of re-
quiring only the bisecting of angles this calls for the trisecting of the hemisphere,
which , in turn , requires a knowledge of the ratio of the circumference of the circle
to its diameter. This system produces angles of 60°, 30°, 15°, and 5 ° and appears
related to the 360° circle, known from ancient times but not used , at least for
navigation , in the Renaissance.
      Various writers refer to the use of the twelve-wind system among the ancients.
According to one (199 : 54), it was employed by the Greek geographer Timosthenes,
an immediate predecessor of Eratosthenes. The latter is said to have abandoned it
in favor of the eight -wind system , because it was too difficult for mariners ( 39:124-
125).4 The system continued to be the one preferred by the Romans, who were
not much interested in the sea . It was known in the Middle Ages8 and is said to
 have been used in the earliest editions of Ptolemy’s maps when they were recovered
 in the 15th Century.
      When I first examined the Venetian chart, what struck me most was that,
 more distinctly than any other chart I had seen , it showed a square grid , dominat-
 ing the portolan design , which appeared to be drawn on True North . Only after
 long examination did I discover that it was, in fact, oriented about 6° to the

     The Venetians, however, apparently made an attempt to use it with the
     4

compass. See Note 16.
   5
     See the discussion of the De Canestris Map below.
Figure 68. A Venetian Map of the African Coast (1484).
                            ANCIENT MAPS        OF THE    EAST    AND   WEST 127




Figure 69. Diagram of the Twelve- Wind System found in the Venetian Map (by
                               Alfred Isroe).

east . Obviously this map has a grid of lines of latitude and longitude. The
diagonal lines were less emphasized than on most other portolanos. Examina -
tion now suggested the possibility of finding a solution of this map by trigonometry.
      The first step was to make a careful comparison of this map with a good map
of the African coast. This revealed that previous scholars, who seem to have
assumed that the map showed the coast from the Strait of Gibraltar to the Cape
of Good Hope, or to a point near the Cape, were apparently in error. It appeared
that the map extended on the north only to about 26° or 27° North Latitude, while
on the south it extended only a few degrees below the equator.
      The intervals of the twelve-wind system made it simple to draw an equilateral
triangle with its apex on the 27 th parallel and its base on the equator , and solve
for the length of the degree with trigonometric tables. A square grid , based on the
length of the degree found in this way, seemed to give very good results, at least
so far as latitude was concerned . It seemed that the latitudes of all identified
points on the coast were accurate to within one- third of one degree, or about
20 miles.
      Longitude findings, however, were not as accurate. Errors averaged about one
degree. This was not very bad , excepting that they were distributed in such a way
as to imply an error of some kind in the projection . The easternmost points were
too far east, the western points too far west , so that it was a question of the length
128    Maps of the Ancient Sea Kings
of the degree of longitude. Were the degrees of latitude and longitude really equal,
as we had assumed ?
      In this situation it seemed best to set aside the trigonometry and try to work
out a grid empirically to see whether the degrees of latitude and longitude were
equal . The reorientation of the map to True North revealed that the top of the
map was not at 26° or 27 ° North, but at 24° North . On this basis, measurements
showed that the degrees were not quite equal . The degree of latitude was, it ap-
peared , slightly shorter than the degree of longitude. Surprisingly, however , the
length of the degree of longitude found empirically now turned out to be precisely
the same as the length of the degree found by trigonometry (see Fig. 71 and
Table 8). It is one thing to work out the grid of a map that has already been
drawn , but quite another to draw the map in the first place. Our work indi-
cated that the map must have been originally drawn on a plane trigonometric pro-
 jection . The fact that the apex of the triangle was found to be at 24° North also
was interesting, in view of the fact that the Greek geographers ( Eratosthenes,
Hipparchus, and their successors) accepted that as the Tropic, for the sake of sim-
plicity even though they knew better. It seems then , that the map was intended
to be fixed astronomically between the Tropic of Cancer and the equator.
      There is evidence that at the southern end of the map some 15th Century
navigator added some coastline. The errors of latitude increase sharply from Cape
Lopez southward to the Congo and Benguela ; they are of the sort to be expected
from 15th Century navigators.
      Another detail should attract our attention in passing . An extra island appears
near Sao Tome on the equator . The fact that the second island ( No. 19, in Fig . 70)
has the same relationship to the equator of the projection oriented to Magnetic
North that the other island we have identified as Sao Tome has to the true
equator suggests that No. 19 is an addition by somebody exploring Africa’s
equatorial coast with the map already oriented to 6° E . This would mean , of
course, that the original explorers were using True North , not Magnetic North .
The 15th Century navigator, sailing by the compass, may have had with him this
map already showing the island, but at its correct place on the sidereal grid .
And so he added the second island .
      But why weren’t these explorers honest enough to admit they were exploring
these coasts with the help of maps many times better than they could draw for
themselves? Or if the Portuguese were using trigonometry and the twelve-wind
system , and had a means of finding longitude, why didn ’t the facts leak out?
King John II of Portugal must have had a very efficient security system!

                       4. The De Canestris Map of 1335-37.

     Our discovery of the twelve-wind system in the Venetian Map of 1484 led
us into a search for other such maps. Various persons collaborated in this search .
                            ANCIENT MAPS        OF THE     EAST   AND   WEST 129
Richard W. Stephenson , of the Map Division of the Library of Congress, went
through the map collections in that library; Dr . Alexander Vietor, Curator of Maps
at the Yale University Library, also made a search for us, without success. Finally,
Alfred Isroe detected the twelve-wind system , in a very dilapidated form , in the
De Canestris Map of 1335-37® (see Fig. 72).
     At first glance this looks like many medieval maps, presumably originating
in the peculiar ideas and limited knowledge of the time. Most ingenious work was
                                                   —
done in adapting the geography to human forms including those of a man and a
woman ( who are seen in lively dispute). Other human heads are observable. This
anthropomorphism appears to have been accomplished without distorting the
geography to any noticeable extent.
     Among the various irregular lines on this map ( many of them introduced to
complete the human forms ), Isroe noticed a few straight lines that suggested the
survival of parts of an original pattern resembling that of the portolanos. Measure-
ments with a protractor showed that, while the angles between them were not
precisely those of the twelve-wind system, they were much closer to those than
to the angles characteristic of the eight -wind pattern.
     Taking this suggestion of Isroe’s, I thought I would try to reconstruct the
possible original pattern . I straightened the two lines emanating from the projec-
tion center at the left of the map, on the assumption that they might have been
intended originally to represent one straight line. This involved only a slight
change. With this change all the other angles of the intersections of the lines
traced by Isroe from the photograph of the original map fell into agreement with
the twelve-wind system (see Figs. 74 and 75) .
      In addition to these indications of an original twelve-wind system on this
     ,
map I discovered a straight line in the Mediterranean that suggested a parallel
of latitude of the original source map. Comparing this line with the present
geography of the Mediterranean, I observed that it indicated an orientation of the
whole map about 1114 ° or 12 ° east of True North , as on so many of the maps
recognized as portolanos . On rotating the map to take into account this apparent
magnetic orientation and get it back on True North , I found that the parallel in
question was the parallel of Alexandria ( Fig. 76). It would seem, then, that this
map, and a whole family of other maps from this period of the Middle Ages, are,
in fact, not so much original productions of the Middle Ages as degenerated ver-
sions of ancient maps, very possibly drawn by the geographers of the School of
Alexandria.

    6
      Isroe had left Keene State College to transfer to the University of Amster-
dam and was pursuing a research project there at my suggestion . I wanted very
much to locate, if possible, the source maps used by Mercator for his “ Atlas” of 1569.
Despite co-operation extended by the Dutch Government, the source maps were
not found. However, Isroe did make a significant discovery, anyway, as we see here.
                                                                     N
                                                                         M. N 6° E




25 ° W   20° W    15° W     10° W       5° W            x      0°             5° E   20 x 10° E   15° E
                                                        or
                                                    O
                                                                         <
                                                    5? 5° S              Q
                                                                         cr
                                                                         UJ
                                                 O                       2
                                                 <c
                                                                         UJ
                                                                         5                   21
                                                o 10° S                  cr
                                                                         CL

                                               <
                                               Q
                                               or
                                               Liii

                                               s    '        15° S

                 Figure 70. The Venetian Map of 1484 , with a modern grid
                 constructed empirically from the geography and confirmed
                 by plane trigonometry. See Table 8.
                                         c
                                             \
                                              \
                                               \
                                                \                          23.5
                                                 \                         .577
                                                  \
                                                   \                       1645
                                                     \                    1645
                                                       \                 1175
                                                        \
                                                         \              13.5595 = 13.5°
                                             23.5°         \
                                                             \
                                 1.000                        \
                                                               \
                                                                \
                                                                  \
                                                                   \
                                                                    \
                                                                     \
                                                                         \
                      0.577
     A                                                                    AB
                      13.5°              D



Figure 71. The trigonometry of the Venetian Map. Given an equilateral triangle,
A - B- C- D, on the earth ' s surface between a point at 23 V2 ° North Latitude and
the Equator , A - B , with the length of C- D given (23 V2 °) - Problem: to find the
length of A D in degrees, to find the length of the degree of longitude on the
draft map. (The ratio 1.000 : 0.577 is taken from ‘ ‘ Natural Trigonometric Func-
tions,” in Chemical Rubber Company Tables, C. D. Hodgman, editor. Cleve-
land: 1956, p. 107.)
                                        *                    T

     i istfjyf                  -...c£ rt   #       Am ? .» «*r ft
>   H Jwt
     .
     4
          Ctm «rihC
         4**»m
                         <             »u       f
                                                    •^ lyrWkl
                                                                       t f
                                                                             ^   ii

    ir ~~*               *W                          i           1 1
                                   ^f
                                                         i
                                   i


                     • **»       4 i' U »
                 7
    V»   , tm
         i               •» > #« fa*« *•**«
    >                           O0




                                                                                      ,4                                          y l
                                                                                                                                   * **
                                                                                      V       - .rUmu                                 9
                                                                                                                                    mu
                                                                                      *
                                                                                                       J «f?« * I**
                                                                                                               » H|WW
                                                                                                                         • T - **•»    I
                                                                                                                              ^            c T

                                                                                          i
                                                                                          .            jm       i   ij   pfruM' r*m        -. *J
                                                                                                                                           < *


                                                                                          :
                                                                                                                                           :4 *
                                                                                              /                                   WM1      ?«
                                                                                                           Trt.              r^: } f
                                                                                                   '


                                                                                                   Ffp«w
                                                                                                            fcr*'rMuj
                                                                                                       *** tmey    ?*                      !r
                                                                                                                                           b 1

                                                                                                                ±0                         * *

                                                                                                                                           if
                                                                                                  -*   n
                                                                                                           -
                                                                                                           i.  TV
                                                                                                                    ***U*4*M
                                                                                                                    IH47   »U
                                                                                                                             VMMCj**»# %
                                                                                                                                      |

                                                                                                                                           ?1
                                                                                                                                           *v
                                                                                                                                           IT
                                                                                                               <K + mA *j:t H
                                                                                                                         »                 r




                                                                                                                                                   J
         .                                                  .
Figure 72 The Opicinus di Canestris Map of 1335—1338 The square grid
suggests one of the projections attributed by Nordenskiold to Rolemy or
Marinus of Tyre. One of the meridians and one of the parallels intersect at the
                                          .
site of Alexandria ( see redrawing, Fig. 73) Assuming the interval to be about
5 °, the map shows surprising accuracies in the latitudes and longitudes of
many geographical localities.
134   Maps of the Ancient Sea Kings




         Figure 73 . The Opicinus di Canestris Map, section (redrawn).


                    5. The Reinel Chart of the Indian Ocean.

     I felt it important to see whether, having found a map of Africa that seemed
to be based on ancient mathematical cartography, it might not be possible to
extend the system to Asia . Thus, I might be able to determine whether the ancient
cartographers of a vanished race had extended their system farther cast . With this
in mind , I examined what is considered to be the earliest Portuguese chart of the
Indian Ocean (see Fig. 77). I attempted an empirical solution of the grid of this
map, along the lines of the investigations of other maps, and made some surprising
discoveries. One was the extent of the geographical knowledge contained in the
map. I found that it showed a number of islands in the Atlantic, as well as a
remarkable knowledge of the archipelagoes of the Indian Ocean itself (see
Table 9) . As I worked out a grid from the identifiable geographical localities on the
map itself , I was astounded to find that this map apparently shows the coast of
Australia, the first and only portolano to do so. The map also appeared to show
some of the Caroline Islands of the Pacific. Latitudes and longitudes on this map
are remarkably good, although Australia is shown too far north .
                           ANCIENT MAPS        OF THE    EAST    AND   WEST 135
      As I continued to examine this map, I saw that the trend of the Australian
coast was wrong, as was its latitude. This reminded me of the Caribbean area of
the Piri Re’is Map. Was it possible that we had here another example of a satellite
grid , with a different north , integrated with the Piri Re’is World Projection ? A
comparison of the map with the world map drawn by the Air Force centered
on Cairo (see Fig. 25) was extremely thought - provoking. A glance at a tracing
of this map with the Piri Re’is projection superimposed on it ( Fig . 27) showed
that the design of the Piri Re’is projection was capable of being used to cover this
area just as well as it was used to cover the Caribbean.
      It seemed evident to me that this map showed much more geographical
knowledge than was available to the Portuguese in the first decade of the 16th
Century, and a better knowledge of longitudes than could be expected of them .
The drawing of the coasts, however, left much to be desired. The map looked
much like a map, once magnificently accurate, that had been copied and recopied
by navigators ignorant of the methods of accurate mapmaking.

                     6. A Twelfth Century Map of China.

      In the effort to see whether the system of ancient maps extended farther east
than the Indian Ocean , I examined the available Chinese and Japanese maps.
Despite the splendid co-operation of the staff of Japan’s great Diet Library ( the
equivalent of our Library of Congress ), which sent me many old Japanese charts,
I was not able to discover any maps that bore apparent relationships to the western
portolanos, except maps of a comparatively late date which might have been influ-
enced by western cartography.
      I had much better luck in China . This was owing entirely to the availability
of Needham’s great work on Science and Civilization in China (145). In Volume
III of that work he reproduced a very remarkable map that had been carved
in stone in China in the year 1137 A .D. (see Fig. 79). Although the map was
carved in 1137, it is known to have been in existence for an indefinite period
before that. Its real date of origin is unknown . Therefore it is wrapped in the same
mystery as are the portolanos of the West. A comparison of the river system
shown on this map with that on a modern map of China shows a remarkable
accuracy (see Figs. 80 and 81 ). This map was evidently drawn with excellent
information as to longitudes, such as we find on the portolanos, but do not find
on the classical maps of Greece and Rome, and which was certainly not typical of
the cartography of medieval China or Japan .
      Needham , and presumably the Chinese scholars who have studied this map,
apparently assumed that its square grid was the original grid on which it had been
drawn ; this was a perfectly natural conclusion for them . On the other hand , I had
 just recently discovered that the square grid inherent in the plane trigonometry
of the portolan projection was evidently not the original grid on which some of
  136   Maps of the Ancient Sea Kings




                                  /
                                //

                           //
                        / /
                     / /
                    / /
                /
                      \
                 Ld^_ ± _
' 5 0°      / 5 2°       63
- -i- -

          Figure 74. Opicinus di Canestris Map, tracing of projection lines.
                          ANCIENT MAPS       OF THE    EAST   AND   WEST 137




Figure 75 . Opicinus di Canestris Map, projection lines restored to Twelve - Wind
                                   System.
138 Maps of the Ancient Sea Kings
                         TRUE " MAGNETIC”
                           N      N
                            \
                                \




                                                                     11 V  40         B
                                         c?
                                                                       L    A   '

                                         \
                                             \
                                                 \
                                                     \
                                                         \
                                                             \
                                                                 \
                                     S                           s
               Figure 76. Opicinus di Canestris Map reoriented.


the source maps used by Piri Re’is and other mapmakers had been drawn . I had
just come to believe, on the contrary, that Piri Re’is’ source map had originally
been drawn with an oblong grid of some kind . Therefore I decided to test the
grid of this Chinese map.
     I began by trying to find the length of the degree of latitude on a tracing of
the map. As before, the procedure was to pick a number of geographical features
that were easily and clearly identifiable and find their latitudes on a modem map.
These were distributed from the northernmost to the southernmost parts of China.
I extended lines from these points to the margins of the tracing and found the
length of a degree of latitude by dividing the number of millimeters on the tracing
                            ANCIENT MAPS       OF THE     EAST   AND   WEST 139
from north to south by the number of degrees of latitude between the identified
points.
     Then I repeated the process to find the length of the degree of longitude.
I supposed it would probably come out the same, but nevertheless a sense of
excitement gripped me as I noted the longitudes of identifiable places across the
map and drew lines from these to the bottom of the tracing. I used a number of
geographical points in each case, for finding the lengths of the degrees of latitude
and longitude, to ensure against the risk that any one of the chosen points might
be out of place because of a local error in the map. Thus, if I depended only upon
two positions, at either extreme of north and south or east and west, an error might
be made in the length of the degree.
     When I finished the measurement of the degree of longitude on the map I
was  truly electrified, for I found that it was unmistakably shorter than the degree
of latitude. In other words, what revealed itself here was the oblong grid found on
the Piri Re’is Map, found on the Ptolemy maps, and found, through spherical
trigonometry, on the De Canerio Map. The square grid found on the map was,
then, clearly something superimposed on the map in ignorance of its true pro-
jection . This, together with the fact that the square grid was similar to the square
portolan grid, created an altogether astonishing parallel, a parallel that suggested
an historical connection between this map and the maps of the West. If I may be
allowed to speculate here, I may suggest that perhaps we have here evidence that
our lost civilization of five or ten thousand years ago extended its mapmaking here,
as well as to the Americas and Antarctica.
     The square grid imposed on the map is evidence of the same decline of
science we have observed in the West, when an advanced cartography, based on
spherical trigonometry and on effective instruments for determining latitudes and
                                                                  —
longitudes, gave way to the vastly inferior cartography of Greece and when , later
in the Middle Ages, even the geographical science known to the classical world
was entirely lost. In China, the square grid was apparently imposed on the map
by people who had entirely forgotten the science by which it was drawn .
     There are other indications that the map was drawn in its present form in an
age of the decline of science in China . Despite the extraordinary accuracy of the
geographic detail of the Chinese interior, the coasts are hardly drawn in at all ;
they are only schematically indicated . This suggests to me that the map was carved
in stone in an age when China had no interest in the outside world , but an enor-
mous interest in the great river system that carried the internal commerce of the
fabulously rich empire. The original map may have shown the coasts in detail; but
in the 12 th Century they were apparently of interest to nobody.
      The map shows some of the rivers flowing in directions different from those
of the modern map. This does not necessarily mean that there were inaccuracies
                                          —
in the ancient map. The rivers of China particularly the Hwang Ho, or Yellow
     —
 River have the habit of changing their course, with the most disastrous conse-
                                                 •   *                                               T\


         •
          \
                  *   ^^        *           *

          .
         . . v.
                                                 Tk                                          i
                                                     <b
                                                          •
     W                                                             -       v

     >T                                                            \




*
     f    '
                                                              \
                                                              tk
•i                                          ;
                                                 *:
     4

     t
                      >< •                   ,   «
                                                                               x
              \         «
                                                     »                         x
         CHVlOUHXmTrl                                                  J

                                                                                         /




                                                                                                 #




                                                                                   URCOLDDEiANi 'IU           *

                                                                                                          r

                                        /
                                    /




     /

>                                           J0
                                                 /




                                                                       —
                            t                                                  /


                       *-           ^   •-r^                      7


                                                          .
                      Figure 77 Portuguese Map of the Indian Ocean, Jorge (?) Reinel, 1510.
OtRGOLO DEi EWCORNl
          ^
 5'



15



25




            T
      ( MERIDIAN OF
        ALEXANDRIA )
                             <-
                                 Q

                           < 2
                           Q LU
                           crCO
                                 LxJ
                           LLJ
                                 o                                                                                 2.5 mm =1° LATITUDE
                           2
                           UJ
                                 =>                                                                         47 / 118.0
                                 ce                                                                               94
                              o
                           cr Q_                                                                                  240
                           QL LL.
                              o                                                                E                  235 5° LAT. = 12.5mm
                                                                                               E                     5
                                                                                             o oo
    4
    I                  I
    I                  i                                                                     II II          TROPIC OF CANCER
                                                                                                            ( TRACED FROM MAP )


                                                           INDIA
                                                                                             o
                                                                                             CM E
                                                                                             co
                                                                                                E            THE CAROLINES
                       i                                                       e»            CM                                   10° N
                       I                                                      o
         -i  —b +      I          I
                                  r
                                                                2                                                                  5° N

                                                                                                  ::
                                                                          c




         -C 1
                  <7
                                                       I
                                                   2ovo?a
                                                       <   j©
                                                                    22,
                                                                          f
                                                                                    24
                                                                                                                                      0

                                                                                                                                   5° S
                                                                                                                                          °
              '                                                                          115° 120° 125° 130° 135° 140° 145° E

0       12                                                                                   O
                                                                                                 C\i
                                                                                                       E
                                                                                                       E
                                                                                             co cn
                                                                              23             CVJ in
                                           16 %
                                                  17
                                           8      &
                                                                                                           TROPIC OF CAPRICORN
                                                                                                            ( TRACED FROM MAP )
        O
        T5                                                                &


    50° 55    °    fa0     °     65° 70° 75° 80° 85° 90° 95° 100° 105° 110               °



                                       Figure 78. Portuguese Map of the Indian Ocean, with grid constructed on the
                                       basis of the length of the degree of latitude as measured between the Tropics
                                       of Cancer and Capricorn , and on the assumption of equal lengths of the degrees
                                       of latitude and longitude. See Table 9.
144 Maps of the Ancient Sea Kings




att ;
   *
             .   :w   '




                                                     )



       , t                                  I



                  Figure 79. The Chinese map of the 12th Century.

quences. The Yellow River is, in fact, called “ China’s Sorrow.” It has changed its
course three times in a century and a half . The ancient map shows it following a
course to the north of its present course, but its course, in one of the northern
valleys, is perfectly reasonable.
     I subjected the grid I had constructed for this map to the most rigorous test-
ing. Using the grid , I identified a large number of additional geographical localities,
mostly the intersections of major rivers, rejecting any that appeared in the least
dubious. I have listed these localities, with the discrepancies in their positions,
in Table 10, a, b, c. I grouped the localities in the northwest, northeast, southwest,
and southeast quadrants of China . In each quadrant in turn I averaged the dis-
crepancies, or errors, in the latitudes and longitudes of places, with the following
results.
                               ANCIENT MAPS         OF THE    EAST        AND   WEST 145
                                Table 10a ( summarized )

                                      Number of
                  Quadrant             Localities          Average Errors

                1 . Northwest              8                 0.4 ° Lat.
                                                             0.0 ° Long   .
                 .
                2 Northeast              10                 0.0 ° Lat.
                                                            0.0 ° Long .

                3. Southwest               9                 1.3° Lat.
                                                             1.2 ° Long.

                 .
                4 Southeast                7                 0.8° Lat.
                                                             1.2 ° Long.


     Here we have evidence that when this ancient map of China was first drawn,
mapmakers had means of finding longitude as accurately as they found latitude,
exactly as was the case with the portolan charts in the West. The accuracy of the
map suggests the use of spherical trigonometry, and the form of the grid , so like
that of the De Canerio Map, suggests that the original projection might have
been based on spherical trigonometry.
     As a further test of the grid I had drawn for the map, I listed separately all
the northernmost and southernmost places identified on the map and averaged
their errors in latitude. I also listed all the easternmost and westernmost places
and averaged their errors in longitude (Tables 10b and 10c) . The average error of
latitude on the north was less than one-half of one degree (or 30 miles!), and
the average error on the south balanced out to zero ( with four localities 1 °
too far south and four 1.2 ° too far north). So far as longitude was concerned , the
errors both on the east and on the west balanced out to zero. There was no indi-
cation , therefore, that the grid constructed for the map was seriously in error .

     It seems to me that the evidence of this map points to the existence in very
ancient times of a worldwide civilization , the mapmakers of which mapped vir-
tually the entire globe with a uniform general level of technology, with similar
methods, equal knowledge of mathematics, and probably the same sorts of instru-
ments. I regard this Chinese map as the capstone of the structure I have erected
in this book . For me it settles the question as to whether the ancient culture that
penetrated Antarctica, and originated all the ancient western maps, was indeed
worldwide.
146 Maps of the Ancient Sea Kings




 Figure 80. The ancient map of China with grid of lines of latitude and longitude
 constructed empirically from the geography. Numbers indicate identified locali -
 ties. See Table 10a .
                           ANCIENT MAPS       OF THE   EAST     AND   WEST 147




                                                                                 40* N




                                                                                 35* N




                                                                                 30* N




                                                                                 25* N




                                                                                 20* N




       100* E         105* E         110* E            115* E          120* E


Figure 81. A modern map of China, with numbers indicating the same localities
                              as Figure 80.
  o
   CHAP
  TER VI
   THE
 ANCIENT ®
   MAPS If
  OF THE Ml
'vNORTH///
                 The Zeno Map of 1380. The Ptolemaic Map of the
                 North. The Map of Andrea Benincasa. The Porto-
                 lano of lehudi Ibn Ben Zara of Alexandria.

                       We have seen that the analysis of a number of maps has led
                 to surprising conclusions and implications. They appear to call in
                 question not only the accepted ideas of ancient history, and espe-
                 cially the history of cartography, but also fundamental concep-
                 tions of geology. We have seen, in the maps already considered ,
                 suggestions of voyages to America and Antarctica that must have
                 occurred in times preceding the oldest of our historical records
                 voyages accomplished by a people or peoples whose memory has
                                                                                  —
                 not survived. The Oronteus Finaeus Map appears to document
                 the surprising proposition that Antarctica was visited and perhaps
                settled by men when it was largely, if not entirely, non -glacial .
                 It goes without saying that this implies a very great antiquity. In
                 the next chapter we shall consider in greater detail the reasons for
                 supposing that the evidence of the Oronteus Finaeus Map takes
                 the civilization of the original mapmakers back to a time con -
                 temporaneous with the end of the ice age in the northern hemi-
                sphere.
                       Facts do not stand alone. A given statement may mean more
                or less depending upon the context . The maps we are now to
                 consider cannot be considered in vacuo. They should be evaluated
                 with some reference to what we have already learned . If they
                 suggest an enormous antiquity for the cartographic tradition their
                 evidence cannot be so easily dismissed as it might be if it stood
alone. I cannot claim that the evidence is so strong as to compel acceptance.
I admit frankly that it is doubtful and may be interpreted in more than one way,
but I do not apologize for suggesting my own interpretation of it.

                           1. The Zeno Map of 1380.
    The Zeno Map of 1380 was supposedly drawn by two Venetians, Niccolo and
Antonio Zeno, who made a famous voyage to Greenland and perhaps Nova
                                                    ••


                                                     S

                                           . D.).
                     o the   North (1380 A
82.   The Zeno
               Map   *
    b



    h




4
152       Maps of the Ancient Sea Kings
Scotia in the 14th Century (see Fig. 82 ). Two hundred years later, a descendant
               —                                 —
of these Zenos an important family in Venice found the map mouldering away
among the family papers, and copied it. He appears to have removed the lines of
the ancient projection , most probably, it would seem , of portolan type, and at-
tempted to substitute one of the new projections that were being developed in
the Renaissance.
      A study of the map itself shows that it was probably not drawn by the Zeno
brothers. In the first place, though they are supposed to have visited only Iceland
and Greenland , the map also shows the coasts of Norway, Sweden , Denmark ,
Germany, and Scotland, and , in addition , the Shetland Islands and the Faroes.
In the second place, a polar type of projection applied empirically to the map
( Fig. 83) shows that the latitudes and longitudes of many places scattered all over
the map are amazingly correct (see Table 11 a ). It is unbelievable that anyone
in the 14th Century could have found accurate latitudes for all these places, to say
nothing of accurate longitudes. Nevertheless, when the map is assumed to be based
on a correct measurement of the longitude across the Atlantic, then the latitudes
of places turn out also to be closely correct, so that the original mapmakers must
have known the correct comparative lengths of the degrees of latitude and longi-
tude in the North Atlantic. This suggests they had sound information on which
to base their map.
      A third consideration is that when we select the 30th meridian of East Longi-
      —                            —
tude the meridian of Alexandria as our prime meridian , and use two norths, as
in the Piri Re’is Map ( but in this case at right angles to each other ), we can draw
a typical portolan grid for this map, which is almost as accurate as the polar projec-
tion (see Fig. 84 and Table lib). It seems probable that this is the result of
conscious intention . It looks very much as if early mapmakers, somewhere and
sometime, found themselves with an excellent map of the North Atlantic and the
Arctic, drawn on a projection based on spherical trigonometry, and very ingeniously
applied their flat projection to it . Their motive in doing this eludes us. They must
have possessed all the necessary information on the latitudes and longitudes of
the geographical features, which could have been derived from the original grid
of the map. Did they work out their map with two norths as a sort of game? There
are a good many examples of crude medieval maps that seem to have originated
as cryptograms or puzzles.
      The suggestion of a vast antiquity behind this map is conveyed by a feature
to which Captain Mallery first drew attention . He pointed out that the Zeno Map
shows Greenland with no ice cap ( 130) . The interior is filled with mountains.
Rivers are shown entering the sea , in some cases at the points where at present
great mountain glaciers are moving down through the mountains to the coast . He
called attention to a flat area stretching across Greenland , interrupted by some
mountains halfway across, and stated that seismic expeditions in recent years found
that the under-ice topography agreed with the Zeno Map. It is quite true that the
                      THE ANCIENT MAPS        OF THE   NORTH     153




Figure 83. The Zeno Map with a reconstructed polar projection.
                      See Table 11a  .
     154        Maps of the Ancient Sea Kings
    90° N          85° N      80° N     75°N       70° N      65 ° N            60° N   55° N   50 ° N
90°N



85 ° N                                                                                             20°E


                                                                                         30
80°N                                                                                    iC         10° E
                                                                       A
                                                                           A

                                                                               28
75 °N                                                         27                                   0°



70°N
                                                           S?                                      10° W




65°N



60°N


                   Figure 84 . The Zeno Map with a square portolan projection.
                                         See Table lib.
         Paul-Emile Victor French Polar Expeditions of 1947-49 did cross the Greenland
         ice cap and make a seismic profile of the thickness of the ice. ( For the profiles, see
         Fig. 46.)
               It might be objected that the flat territory shown extending across Greenland
         in the Zeno Map is above water, while what the Victor Expedition revealed was a
         strait cutting Greenland into two or three islands. This, however, might be
         explained . It is not impossible that if the original map was made when Greenland
         was ice-free, the region was then standing higher relative to sea level . Later, with
         the imposition of a very thick ice cap ( more than a mile thick ) the land might be
         expected to sink under the weight enough to bring it below sea level .
              Captain Mallery placed great emphasis on this evidence that the mapping
         was done a very long time ago. In my opinion this aspect of the map needs to be
         considered in connection with the entire body of evidence derived from the ancient
         maps, even though , by itself , it may be easy to disregard it. The mountains, valleys,
         and rivers shown in Greenland , it might be argued , represent the medieval carto-
         graphic imagination , and the low area stretching across Greenland may be mere
         coincidence. As I have already said , the reader is entitled to his own conclusions.
                                 THE ANCIENT MAPS          OF THE    NORTH 155
     Each of the maps presented new and special problems, but the Zeno Map
was especially difficult. Since my solution was achieved by a step- by-step process,
and can only be clearly understood if followed chronologically, I will try to recon-
struct each step in the process in turn, as it actually occurred . I must emphasize
that when I started on the analysis of this map, I had not the slightest idea what
it would reveal . I was not optimistic that it would reveal anything. I had been
discouraged by the fact that the portolan type of design , which I supposed must
have originally been on the map, had apparently been replaced by the 16th Century
Zeno with a more modern sort of grid , ending the possibility of a solution along
the lines of the Piri Re’is Map. My students had failed to solve the problem , and
so had the cartographers of the Air Force. Therefore, we just put the map away,
and I intended to ignore it.
     The map had been studied by Mallery in his book , Lost America , but we were
not in agreement with his conclusions. He had noted the accuracy of the ancient
map, with respect to many points in Greenland , by drawing a grid of his own ,
based on the geographical points themselves, but not extending to the whole map.
He assumed further that the large island to the east of Greenland on the Zeno
Map was not meant to be Iceland . In his opinion this island represents Gunnbiorn’s
Skerries, islands that reportedly existed in medieval times along the Greenland
coast, but now are partly subsided beneath the sea and partly covered by the
Greenland ice cap. We could not agree with this.1
     In March , 1964, during the preparation of the manuscript of this book, I
decided to take one last look at the map and to review carefully just what Mallery
had done, in order to see whether it was really as accurate as he claimed . I had run
across an article by the geologist William H . Hobbs (93), who knew his Greenland
and who said that the map was remarkably accurate. Therefore, I got out the map,
looked at it , and collected and laid out a number of modern maps of the samr
            —
general area maps of the North Atlantic and of the Arctic.
     First I noticed that the grid actually on the map was not the portolan kind ,
but a sort of circular, polar one. By comparison with modern maps, I could see the
sense of this. After all, this was a polar area . It seemed that the square or oblong
grids of most of the other ancient maps would never do here. Meridians in Green -
land pointing north could not be parallel to meridians in Norway pointing north .
The meridians had to converge at the poles. It did not occur to me then that the
problem might be solved by using two norths.
     Was it possible that this was, after all, the original projection, as the 14 th
Century Zenos had found it?
     I analyzed the projection farther. Assuming that each space between the

    1
      Although we did not agree with Mallery’s conclusions, we wish to emphasize
that he deserves the credit for pioneering the study of this map, as he pioneered
that of the Piri Re’is Map.
156       Maps of the Ancient Sea Kings
meridians and the parallels represented one degree, I counted the degrees to see
how much longitude there was across the Atlantic. I picked two recognizable places,
Cape Farewell at the tip of Greenland and Cape Lindesnes at the tip of Norway.
These places were nearly at the same latitude. Since Cape Farewell is at Longitude
44° West, and Lindesnes is at Longitude 5° 30* East, the total longitude difference
equaled 49 % °. On the Zeno Map, however, counting each meridian as one degree,
the longitude difference was only 30 °, obviously very far off . With latitude similarly,
starting with the true position of Cape Farewell at 60° North Latitude and count-
ing northward , the northernmost identifiable point in Greenland , Cape Atholl on
the west coast, would lie at only 67° N , instead of 77° ( though the map starts by
erroneously putting Cape Farewell nearly 6° too far north , as the reader can see) .
      I played with the idea that perhaps the 16th Century Zeno had made a
mistake. He might have misinterpreted the grid . Perhaps each interval equaled
two degrees of latitude or longitude, instead of one. This idea was not really satis-
factory either , because it would give 60° across the Atlantic, instead of the
correct 49*4 °. Furthermore, the curvature of the parallels of latitude across the
Atlantic did not seem to me to be sufficient for the high latitude of Greenland .
A comparison with modern maps of the polar region showed the difference in
curvature. It seemed to me that the degree of curvature on the Zeno Map would
be appropriate to a much lower latitude.
      Finally, it was evident from the geography itself that the grid did not accu-
rately represent north for either Greenland or Norway; there should be a much
sharper convergence of the meridians. If the meridians as shown on the map are
projected to the point of meeting, the pole so found is much too far north of
Greenland ( the northernmost point of which is actually only about six degrees from
the pole) and the island thus is pushed much too far south .
      I concluded that somebody had made a mistake, at some time or other, in
applying this sort of projection to the map. It might well have been the sixteenth
century Zenos, but hardly the earlier Zeno brothers, for no one in the 14 th Century
drew grids of latitude and longitude on circular projections.
      There was nothing to do but start afresh and draw a projection to fit the
      —
map not just to fit Greenland , but to fit the map as a whole. The first problem
was to find the right location for the North Pole. My first step was to find two
localities on opposite sides of the Atlantic in about the same latitude. As stated ,
I found Cape Farewell in Greenland at 60 ° North , and Cape Lindesnes in Norway
at 58° North . These are both very clearly shown on the Zeno Map. I now sought
to draw a curved line, to represent the 60 th parallel of north latitude, from Cape
Farewell to a point just north of Cape Lindesnes. To do this I began by finding
what seemed the direction of north in Greenland and also in Norway on the Zeno
Map and drawing lines running due north until they met at a point representing
the pole. The first experiment did not work because, when I described a circle
with this point as a center and with a radius to Cape Farewell, it did not pass just
                                 THE ANCIENT MAPS          OF THE    NORTH 157
north of Cape Lindesnes. I then experimented in raising or lowering the polar
point, and moving it slightly this way and that, until I found a point from which
I could describe a circle that would intersect Greenland and Norway at the same
latitude (60° N ), that is, the latitudes of Cape Farewell and Cape Lindesnes. Then
it was a simple matter to subdivide the radius by thirty ( the number of degrees
between the 60 th parallel and the pole) to find the length of the degree and draw
a grid . This grid , it is true, did resemble very much the grid of the original map,
though it was differently oriented and the parallels curved more sharply. Meridians
could now be drawn easily at five-degree intervals from this pole, starting with
Cape Farewell in 44° West Longitude.
     The first grid drawn in this way, when tested , did not prove sufficiently
accurate. It indicated that my pole was too low, because of some mistake in finding
the direction of north in Greenland and Norway. There were twenty-one and a
half degrees of longitude too many between Cape Farewell and Cape Lindesnes.
Since I had started counting my degrees from Cape Farewell, assuming correct
longitude for that point (44° W ), I found Cape Lindesnes to be 21 y2° too far east .
At the same time, however, the latitudes of all the points seemed remarkably
accurate. I was afraid that if I corrected the grid to get correct longitude across
the Atlantic, the latitudes would be thrown way out . And I reflected that the
ancient map was more likely to have been wrong on longitude than on latitude.
      Nevertheless, I thought it worthwhile to assume that the ancient mapmaker
knew the relative longitudes of Norway and Greenland precisely, and I therefore
raised the pole enough so that the meridians from Cape Farewell and Cape
                                                             —
Lindesnes would meet there at precisely the angle of 49 *4 ° the correct longitude
difference. This meant a very considerable change in the length of the degree of
latitude as well as in that of longitude. It was therefore with real anxiety that I
drew a new grid on the map (as shown in Fig. 83) and tabulated the positions of
the localities. To my astonishment I found that with the revision of the degree
of longitude, the accuracy of latitude of the whole map was notably increased .
How accurately the ancient mapmakcr knew the latitudes and longitudes of points
in the North Atlantic is evident from Table 11a. The navigators who gave
him his data must have had good instruments for finding both latitude and longi-
tude. It is highly probable also that they knew the distances they traveled , and had
an accurate knowledge of the size of the earth .
      It goes without saying that this map was not drawn by the Zeno brothers.
They traveled over only a small part of the area mapped; they had no way of
finding longitude, and in the late 14 th Century they could not have found accurate
latitudes for the points on the Greenland coast . So far as we know, they had no
                                  —
idea at all of the size of the earth even the estimate of Ptolemy, wrong as it was,
was not yet available to them .
      The map, then , was very probably a copy of an ancient map. A version may
have reached Venice from Constantinople, perhaps soon after the Fourth Crusade
       158    Maps of the Ancient Sea Kings
                                                                                        90°




                          o
                                        \              \\ T i/                                                                                %
                                                                                                                                                        -
                                                                                                                                                      \ \ .\7.v

                                                                                                                                                                       l.
                                                                                                                                       N                                   ‘v »

                                                   " m %m                                                                     S
                                  ^\
                                   rVvVvV \ V ;;.
                                           '   '


                                                    !
                                                      \ i
                                                          NV
                                                          -
                                                        iV *‘                            &&
                                                                                         V                   jiv.             x
                                               ft!
                                                                                        | |
                                                                                        jj|                     '


                                                                                                                    ns                  x         y
                                                                                                                                                                        v
                                                                                                                                                      mm* \\ .
                                                                                                                              v         .
                                                                                                                                      I: '!
                                                                                                                                                                                               i

                                                    ml                                                                                mms»                   A
                                   \                                                                                m                                       r \\  v^
                                   y




                                                                                                                                                            -
                                                                                                                          X   *                       \

                                                                                                                                                                    \  \
                                                                                                                                                                \ \ >
                                                                                                                                                                                                            1
                                        ' \ v£\                                    \
                                                                                                                                  l

                                                                                                                                                                                                            -
                                                                                                                              :\            sJYQ                                           Tm
                                                                                                                                                                                                     .•.i
                                                                                                                                                                                j
180°                                                                                                                                                                                                            0°
                              ;
                              ;                                                                                                                                   ait      •    . .
                                                                                                                                                                               i '/ v *:       \
                                                                                                                                                                                                   - .vf
                                                   «0
                                        ,Vir   y   .:
                                                      oc
                                               :- .y/' >                 A |1             uj
                                                                                                        SSsij
                                                                                                              mi                                                   v   /                   b
                                                        &SS



                                                                                   __£-V
                                          IX       •• -
                                                          -2Si      ;;

                                                                              LLLI ’,
                                                                                                                                                                       ••
                                                                                                  ft;
                                                              ..
                                                        X-&
                                               /
                                                        itv r i


                                                                                   11 Pl         llWMr
                                                              ..
                                                              ’’v
                                                                                                         .
                                                                                                   r*: •S’
                                                                                                   .•
                                        «
                                                                                                   *


                                                                                         rAWR

                                                                                         ,•* .
                                                                          .


                                                                                m m
                                                                                                                     \
                                                                                                                    BMM

                                                                                        90°
                 Figure 85. Map of the world on a stereographic projection                                                                                         .
       of 1204 A .D., in which the Venetians captured Constantinople. It is interesting to
       speculate on the nature of its original projection. In reviewing the different projec-
       tions used by ancient and modern mapmakers (60) I noted that on a map of the
       world drawn on the stereographic projection Greenland is shown at an angle to
       Norway similar to its angle on the Zeno Map (see Fig. 85) . The stereographic
       projection dates from ancient times.
                                 THE ANCIENT MAPS         OF THE     NORTH 159


                      2. The Ptolemaic Map of the North.2
     One of the great events of the 15th Century was the recovery of the works
of Claudius Ptolemy, the last great geographer and cartographer of classical
antiquity, who lived in the 2 nd Century A.D. The works included a treatise on
geography, still of great interest, tables of latitudes and longitudes of known
geographical localities, and a large body of maps.
     The maps published in the 15th Century, although attributed to Ptolemy,
are not considered to have been actually drawn by him. Some authorities have
considered that they were reconstructed from the tables sometime during the
Middle Ages, or even in the 15th Century. Others, on the other hand , feel that no
one in the Middle Ages (or 15th Century ) was capable of reconstructing the maps
in such detail from the tables left by Ptolemy. Among the latter is the Danish
scholar Gudmund Schiitt, author of a treatise on Ptolemy. Schiitt writes :
     It is well known that the study of geography decayed lamentably after the
                                                                         '


close of the Roman period , or even earlier. How, then , could ignorant copyists
in medieval times have undertaken the enormous task of constructing a detailed
atlas on the base of the Ptolemaic text, and have carried it out so remarkably well?
Such an idea cannot be entertained . The manuscript atlases, as we have them ,
at the first glance are proved to be copies of a classical original , executed by an
expert who . . . represented the highest standard of geographical science of the
classical era . (186)
     Schiitt adds more evidence to support his conclusion , showing in some detail
that the manuscript atlases of Ptolemy recovered in the 15th Century are closer
in style to other surviving works of the 4th Century A .D. than they are to those
of the 5 th and 6th Centuries. This would suggest that the maps we have were
the work of someone who lived within two centuries of the lifetime of Ptolemy
even if they were not drawn by him . It is entirely possible that they were good
copies of maps he drew.
     Ptolemy himself worked at the Library of Alexandria , and had at his disposal
not only the contemporary information on the geographical features of the known
world (see his World Map, Fig. 6) but also the works of preceding geographers,
such as Marinus of Tyre, and the maps that had been accumulated during the
library’s five centuries of existence. It can be considered likely that he saw the
prototypes of some of the maps we have been studying in this book, though
he may not have realized the aspects in which they were superior to the cartography
of his own time.

    21 have seen three versions of this map. The one reproduced in Fig. 26 is
from the “ Monumenta Cartographica Vaticana ” ( Vatican Atlas), Vol. I, Plate LII,
and is entitled “Carta Dei Paesi Settentrionale Dell’ Europa Contenant la Geo      -
graphia di Tolemeo.”
                              ,4

                                           f   uZ
                                                     •
                                                     l




                                                    is


Figure 86. A Ptolemaic Map of the North.
A   - **•   v
     A l^nj M mtnitl
                '      Kn’<




                              G O T T H I A- O M
                              6 N T A U S4 ’
/



    Figure 87. Redrawing of the Ptolemaic Map of the North .
ss
99

Z9

 89

 69

 09

     19

     29

      £9

      fr9

      99

       99

          Z9

          89

           69

            0Z

            IZ
164    Maps of the Ancient Sea Kings
      The map we are now to consider is similar in style to those published in all
 the Ptolemy atlases in the 15th Century. It reflects, as they do, considerable
 information on the latitudes of places but exceedingly poor conceptions of longi-
tude. Ptolemy had to depend on travelers’ itineraries and similar information for
his estimates of distances in the Roman Empire, for there was little geographical
information derived from stellar observations. What there was dealt with latitudes
only, since there was no scientific way of determining the longitudes of places. As a
result, the shapes of countries and seas were sadly distorted on the Ptolemy maps,
as we saw in the comparison Nordenskiold made of his Mediterranean map with
the Dulcert Portolano ( Fig. 4).
      In Ptolemy’s Map of the North ( Figs. 86, 87) we see these characteristics. Our
version of the map seems to be the work of two different copyists. The part includ -
ing Britain and Ireland is Ptolemaic in outline, but it is decorated with an artistic
scroll device of geometrical character and has no internal details. The rest of the
 map is more typical of Ptolemaic maps in general , and shows a number of authentic
geographical details, such as the lakes of southern Sweden.
     The most remarkable detail of the map is the evidence it appears to contain
relative to glaciation . It shows Greenland largely, but not entirely, covered by ice.
The shape of the island suggests that of the Zeno Map and may come from the
                                                        —
same ancient source. The ice is artistically suggested there even seeming to be a
sheen such as might be produced by the reflection of sunlight from the ice surface.
There is a suggestion that when the map was drawn the ice cap was much smaller
than it is now (such as it is indeed supposed to have been during the early Norse
occupation ) .
      If we turn our attention to southern Sweden we see further evidence of what
seems to be glaciation . Although there are still glaciers in Scandinavia , there is none
in this part of Sweden . But the map shows features drawn in the same style as the
Greenland ice cap. Unbelievable as it may appear, they actually do suggest the
remnant glaciers that covered this country at the end of the last ice age, about
10,000 years ago. Some fine details strengthen the impression. Lakes are shown
suggesting the shapes of present -day lakes, and streams very much suggesting
glacial streams are shown flowing from the “glaciers ” into the lakes. To me, there
is a strong suggestion here of the rapid melting of the glaciers during the period
of the withdrawal of the ice. It goes without saying, of course, that no one in the
15th Century, no one in earlier medieval times, and no one in Roman times ever
had any suspicion of the former existence of an ice age in northern Europe. They
could not have imagined glaciers stretching across southern Sweden and they
would not have invented them .
                                                                            —
                                                            —          —
     Additional details deserve notice. Features of the same type some of them
following the ridges of mountain chains, but some not can be observed on this
map behind the German and Baltic coasts. They begin in the Erz Gebirge, or
Hartz Mountains, in Germany, in correct longitude relative to southern Sweden ,
                                THE ANCIENT MAPS          OF THE    NORTH 165




              Figure 88. Physiographic Map of southern Sweden.


and stretch eastward across the Riesen Gebirge ( the Sudeten Mountains) to the
main range of the Carpathians, where they turn sharply southward, in the direction
of the axis of the mountain range. Then the map shows the glacier turning north -
ward, where it seems to follow quite accurately the highlands of Western White
Russia ( bordering Poland on the east ) and ending in the Livonian Highlands in
about 57° N, in correct latitude relative to southern Sweden.
     I do not think that these features should be dismissed as merely representing
mountains, even although the 15th Century copyist can only have assumed they
were mountains. It is natural enough that the glaciers of the end of the ice age
should have lingered longest in the mountainous areas, but there are no mountains
in southern Sweden , and there are no mountains in Poland or Livonia . Figure 88
shows the present topography in southern Sweden .
     Comparing the Ptolemy Map of the North with the Zeno Map, we can see
                                          .
Figure 89. The Andrea Benincasa Map of 1508
                                  THE ANCIENT MAPS           OF THE    NORTH 167
that they are related , but that they must have derived from sources dating from
different times. If the original source of the Ptolemy Map came from the end of
the ice age, that of the Zeno Map may have originated much earlier.

                       3. The Andrea Benincasa Map of 1508.3

     This is one of the best of the portolan charts (see Fig . 89) . Examination
revealed that it was oriented to Magnetic North , about 6° E.
     To draw a grid for this map we first found the length of the degree of longitude
by measuring the distance on the map in millimeters between known points at
                        —                                   —
either end of the map in this case Gibraltar and Batum and dividing the milli-
meters by the number of degrees of longitude between them . The length of the
degree of latitude was found in the same way separately by using points on the
Atlantic coast from Cape Yubi to Ireland , and points on the east from Cairo to
Yalta . On our draft map, we found the longitude degree to be 7 mm , the latitude
degree on the Atlantic to be 9 mm, and the latitude degree on the east to be 5 mm .
As the longitude degree was intermediate, we took this as the basis for our grid .
There were not enough points (and not enough total latitude) on the east to give
us a reliable measure for the degree ( Fig. 90).
     The grid had to be tied to some geographical reference point, and for this
we chose Cape Bon , near the former site of Carthage, as it was central and well
delineated on the map. Subsequently we discovered an error of about one degree
affecting the whole map, and therefore moved our meridians one degree to the east.
The resulting grid indicated an amazing accuracy for the map as a whole. Table 12
shows that longitude errors, on the basis of the length of the degree assumed by us,
average less than a degree in a total of forty-seven degrees (or nearly 3,000 miles)
between Batum and Gibraltar. This is an indication that the mapmaker could find
precise relative longitudes of places, something which , as we have just seen , Ptolemy
could not do.
     In order to evaluate this map’s most remarkable feature it is necessary to lay
emphasis upon the fact that it is one of the most accurate of all the portolanos in
its delineation of the details of the coasts. At the same time it shows in its accuracy
of latitude and longitude that, like some of the other maps, it can only have been
drawn originally with the aid of spherical trigonometry. It is therefore a scientific
product in the true sense of that term .
     The feature in question is at the north , and looks at first glance like a very
bad representation of the Baltic. A comparison with a modern map shows that
the Baltic runs nearly north and south , while on this otherwise so accurate map
it runs east and west. There is no evidence of either the existence of the upper

     3
         “ Carta Nautica de Andrea Benincasa ” (Ancona, 1508) Borg. VIII, in “Monu-
menta Cartographica Vaticana,” Vol. I, Plate XX.
                                                                                                                  15* N
                                                                                      30°E       35* E
                                                                 #
                                 w   5* W       5* E   10*E                   25*E                       40*E
                             #
25 *W   20* W   15* W   io                  0                  15 E    20 E                                     45 E
                  Figure 90. The Andrea Benincasa Map with square grid constructed empirically
                                      from the geography. See Table 12 .
                                  THE ANCIENT MAPS          OF THE    NORTH 169
Baltic or of the Gulfs of Bothnia and Riga . What could be the reason for this?
This map is dated 1508, when the Baltic was, in fact, very well known . For nearly
three centuries before this date it had been a highway of commerce, dominated
by the merchant ships and navy of the Hanseatic League. Furthermore, its shape
was better known to Ptolemy, as is shown by the map we have just discussed .
     As we look at this feature on the Benincasa Map we note details that differ
considerably from other representations of bodies of water on maps of the 15th
                                                            —
and 16th Centuries. Is this large feature really the Baltic or is it a mass of ice?
Are those blobs along the southern edge supposed to be harbors along the Baltic
coast of Germany, or are they run -off lakes from the melting glacier? Are those
apparent islands really islands, or are they deglaciated tracts in the middle of the
retreating ice cap? I was greatly intrigued by these possibilities, and considered the
evidence very strong indeed when I observed that the general contour of the
southern side of this “ Baltic” followed very precisely the shape of the southern side
of the Scandinavian continental ice cap as it stood about 14,000 years ago.
Unfortunately, further observation showed that this ice cap did , in fact, closely
follow the shape of the Baltic coast (see Fig. 91 ) .
      In all the maps that show this erroneous shape of the Baltic there also appears
a break in the Baltic coast. It seems that the accurate portolano in each case
extends to Britain , and to the coast of the Netherlands. Then an entirely different
source map has been used , and this map has been misinterpreted so that the coast
of the Netherlands is mistaken for the coast of Denmark , which is thus placed
about 250 miles too far west, much coastline being omitted . This apparently
distorted map of the Baltic may have been circulating in southern countries
                  —
Portugal or Italy where the true shape of the Baltic was less known . It is my
                                                                                   —
suggestion that cartographers in those countries may have happened upon this old
map, along with the others that had somehow reached Europe from Constantinople
or elsewhere, and combined it with the normal portolano.
      Another possibility is provided by the consideration that there was a time in
the post-glacial period when the Baltic may very well have had the shape shown

     —
                                                        —
on these maps. The northward extensions of the sea the Gulfs of Bothnia and
Riga probably were covered by the ice long after the lower Baltic had become
ice-free. Since they are both very shallow, they may even have been above sea level
when the sea level was several meters lower.

             4. The Portolano of Ieliudi Ibn Ben Zara of Alexandria.4
    We have mentioned that Nordenskiold considered all the portolan charts to
be copies of one original. It seems to me that the portolano of Ichudi Ibn Ben Zara
of Alexandria ( Fig . 92) may stand very close to this original.

     “Carta Nautica di Iehudi Ben Zara,” Alessandrio d’Egitto, 1497. Borg. VII ,
     4

“ Monumenta Cartographica Vaticana,” Vol. I , Plate XIX.
170     Maps of the Ancient Sea Kings
  22°            24°          26°             16°          24°           32°




 vo, Vov £
         ^



           60°




           56




                       Figure 91. Glacial map of the Baltic.

     I had been attracted to the study of this portolano because it seemed definitely
superior to all the other portolan charts I had seen in the fineness of its delineation
of the details of the coasts. As I examined these details in comparison with the
modern maps, I was amazed that no islet, no matter how small, seemed too small
to be noted . For example, on the French coast, along with the principal features,
I found the mapmaker had drawn in the tiny islets, the lie de Re and the lie
d’Oleron , north of the mouth of the Gironde River. North of the mouth of the
Loire he included Belle He and two other small islets. Off Brest, he drew in the
He d’Ouessant . Similar fine details can be found all around the coasts.
     The grid worked out for the map ( Fig. 93) revealed , indeed , a most amazing
accuracy so far as relative latitudes and longitudes were concerned . Total longitude
Figure 92. The Map of Ibn Ben Zara, 1487
                                       .
                                    u                                  TRUE  " MAGNETIC ”
                                                                                            °
                                                                      NORTH NORTH ( 111/4 E )
60                                                                                                                        °
                                                                                                                        60 N
55   °                                                                                                                   °
                                                                                                                        55 N
 °
50                                                                                                                        °
                                                                                                                        50 N
45                                                                                                                        °
                                                                                                                        45 N
 °
40                                                                                                                      40° N
                                                                                                                          °
                                                                                                                        35 N
 °
30                                                                                                                        °
                                                                                                                        30 N
25°                                                                                                                       °
                                                                                                                        25 N
 °
20                                                                                                                        °
                                                                                                                        20 N
           °
         15 W        °
                   10 W        °
                              5 W        0°       5°E         °
                                                            10 E           °
                                                                         15 E          °
                                                                                     20 E       2     °
                                                                                                     30          °
                                                                                                               35 E
           -                                                 398 mm
         Figure 93. The Ibn Ben Zara Map with a square grid constructed empirically from the geography. See Table 13.
                                THE ANCIENT MAPS         OF THE    NORTH      173




        *




                Figure 94 . The Faces of the Ibn Ben Zara Map.

between Gibraltar and the Sea of Azov was accurate to half a degree, total latitude
from Cape Yubi to Cape Clear, Ireland , was accurate to a degree and a half .
Average errors of latitude for the whole map were less than one degree; average
errors of longitude amounted to little more (see Table 13). As far as the map as a
whole was concerned, there was no evidence of an oblong grid . Like the Benincasa
Map, it seemed to have been drawn for a square grid . Yet a complication was to
appear, as we shall see below.
     Alfred Isroe, my student, drew my attention to one of the most remarkable
features of the map. These were five tiny faces in medallions in the corners of the
map, where mapmakers of the Renaissance followed the custom of placing faces
symbolizing the winds. Usually such faces are not found on the portolan charts.
    174    Maps of the Ancient Sea Kings
    In Renaissance maps they are usually shown with their cheeks puffed out, obviously
    blowing vigorously in the appropriate direction.
         The faces on the Ben Zara Map are not typical of the cartography of the
    Renaissance. Their cheeks are not puffed out . The faces are calm and aristocratic
    in mien, and the clothing indicated does not seem characteristic of the contempo-
    rary styles.
         Isroe suggested at first that the faces resembled faces found on icons of the
    Greek Orthodox Church , such as were, he said , produced by the famous icono-
    graphic school of Parnassus in the 7th and 8th Centuries A .D. This was exciting
    indeed . Could it be that we had here an accurate copy of an ancient portolano
    that had come through a Greek monastery of the 8th Century? Ibn Ben Zara had,




40 N ~23




     Figure 95. The Ibn Ben Zara Map, Spanish section, with oblong grid constructed
                  empirically from the geography   . See Table 14.
                                                                                                                                                          THE ANCIENT MAPS                                                                                              OF THE                                   NORTH 175
                                                                                                        '1*          \    M «A                     •VfcMI                                                •   TA1VIA    -
                                   I                                                                                                                                                                                                    1«              1   «            4»                             «
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         M          1                1«        II
                                                                                                                                                             V                                                                                                                                                                           *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              « •» •» •« iv
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              <




                                   i
                                       V



                                       .        •
                                                    .»
                                                    *


                                                    :V :« r V
                                                        ?
                                                                     .
                                                                     7%
                                                                     » Vf
                                                                      " AL
                                                                                      3                          i<1/        .       'v
                                                                                                                                       !
                                                                                                                                              .
                                                                                                                                                  »•
                                                                                                                                                        vKl \ N \ >


                                                                                                                                                                                                   3** ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                         CAMAMlV*
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              /
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     •
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      <rlMul
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              »uia *         i
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         ..
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         l »



                                                                                                                                                                                                     -
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   -.
                                                                                                                                                                                                     *
                                                                .. IV
                                                                                                                                 IMIM
                                                                                                                                                                                                     ••
                                                                                                                                                                                                         '

                                                                                                                                                                                                              *
                                                                                                                 *        jrs                is     „*                                                                                                                                                                                             l>       >   <« WHA « tW
                                       V        *
                                                                                                                                 *                                                                    •      fzX                                                                                                                               c~. r
                                                                                                                                                                                                  JTT - ^
                                                                                                                                                                                                    •»**       ?
                                                                                                          tk <                                                                                                'T
                                                                                               ruar ; *
                       I                                                                                                             IUM




                                                    v                   *9*                       B • *\f *•r
                                                                                                            »
                                                                                                                *•
                                                                                                                             <
                                                                                                                                     .
                                                                                                                                                        *V « » n
                                                                                                                                                          TAB

                                                                                                                                                               t
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   as                                                                                                           r*  .»


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               V'l'M *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               I




                                           >4
                                                                                              \                                          » M|
                                                                                                                                            |
                                                                                                                                                                   •i
                                                                                                                                                                            .4   A    4   .                                                                                     •-   #

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        ca-iP
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        zzrJiirr                 ..- .~     •>   «*
                                   <                                                                                                                                    ;
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ..
                                                                                                                                                                        •                                                                                                                           / V



                                                                                                                                         .** X-
                                                                                                                                                                   ;                                                                    \
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              .*                                                    4
                                                                 t
         lf                                                                               » .cr                      S IM «
                                                                                                                             « »r\
                                                                                                                                 .
                                                                                                                              *• i»V
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  nr
                                                                                                                                                                                                                           -.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                           '
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               JJ
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    V
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             r.    ..           .   » M
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         »!*  •<
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        S’

                                                                                                        ~
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        I

                                                                                                               «•                                                                                                                                                                *                                                                 :\
                                                            *
                                                                                      ^                                      '                                                                                                                          0

                                                                                                               IV'IIA                               SIS                .                                                       M



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        r >
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         tf   . • . .\-
                                                                                                                                                                                                  $                                                                                                                                                  I .:
                                                                                                                                                                       I A
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 »%
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        .                           .p                                                                               >« v        .*
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    n:
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 i
         I.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   *»   •V                          Vs
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                •*  J         ;>T                                                                                                        > WI




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    ..1-
                                                                                                                                                                       M
                                                                                                                             y;,U‘
                                                                                                                                         v*. l>TA                                                                      »«          CJ
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             /
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      7         *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    •                                                                                   1        «
                                                                              fXL *mrvi                                                            NIA
                                                                                                                                                         .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   •


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     '*
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        ^
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             i
                                                                                                                                                         T                           i'
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 \
                           :

                                                                                          -
                                                                                          /
                                                                                                            .    j       *               *              ••                                                                              Kli         ,'                                                                                                               J
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     "* Hl»'
                                                                                  .                                          |xP
                                                                                                                                     Bl
                                                                                                                                                  \ N|A
                                                                                                                                                                                                     .
                                                                                                                                                                                                     " .
                                                                                                                                                                                                  i** **
                                                                                                                                                                                                    . /
                                                                              S,

                                                                                                                                                   -
         ?
             A*
                                                                                                                     r;
                  «
                      -v<      *
                                                                                                      i « ti
                                                                                                            •
                                                                                                                • * »*       •- .        v                   .* %

                                                                                          9
                                                                                      • *“
                                                                     •t                                                                                                                                                                                                 M A R I MUAWVM
                                                                          i                                                                  *< £              r                                                                                                                                                 •
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         I


 .
 r                                                                            *T
                                                                                  n C
                                                                                             VT'
                                                                                                        *                                         \ /
                                                                                                                                                    i
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             i
                                                                                                                             VV                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             .
                                                                                          -
                                                                                          'I
                                                                                                  l                                               M \ M IMNr \ At                                                                                                                                                                                                                       •
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ' * *« * •
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      .
                                                                                          ' Jt'                                                                                               I

     L                INIIMV ' M M*'
                                                                                               *                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     \           1

 t                                                                                                                                                                                                l ’•
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    I                                                    «•                 «•            I'




                                                                                                          Figure 96. Rolemy’s Map of Spain.

of course, added modern names to his chart, but perhaps he had made no other
changes in his ancient source map. This matter required intensive examination .
     I took the matter up with my aunt , Mrs. Norman Hapgood , who is a scholar
and a translator with a knowledge of Russian and other eastern tongues. She said
that, to her , the faces looked Coptic. I investigated Coptic art in Harvard ’s Fogg
Museum and was well rewarded . A number of treatises gave me some light on the
subject . Among these, two in particular were useful (80, 4).
     Gruneisen , one of these scholars, describes the Coptic art born in Alexandria
before the rise of Christianity as “ frivole , spirituel , profondement raffing et aristo-
cratique par excellence ." 8 The reader may judge for himself how far the little
faces agree with this description ( Fig. 94) . As I have already pointed out in connec-
tion with the Piri Rc’is and other maps there is reason to believe that the portolan
charts did in fact come through Alexandria and were copied and arranged by the
geographers of Alexandria , who may, indeed , have originated the flat portolan
projection itself . In view of this, the Hellenistic-like faces may be quite significant.
     I have mentioned that the grid worked out for this map indicated that a

              8       “Frivolous, intellectual ,                                                                                              deeply refined, above all aristocratic.”
176 Maps of the Ancient Sea Kings




              Figure 97. The Ibn Ben Zara Map, Aegean section      .
square grid , not an oblong one, was probably the sort of grid used in drawing the
map, or at least in compiling it from local maps. Table 13 strongly suggests this.
     I was profoundly surprised , therefore, when one of my students, Warren Lee,
discovered that, in regards to Spain , the grid indicated by the topography was
oblong, and not square (see Fig. 95 and Table 14). This is, indeed , astonishing.
How can it be explained ? Are we to suppose that the mapmakcr who compiled
the whole map, and did it so very well, made use of separate maps of different
countries, and among these used a map of Spain that had been drawn earlier,
perhaps on the same projection as the Dc Canerio Map?
     Warren Lee is responsible for another interesting observation . In his study
of the Spanish sector of the map he observed that it showed a large bay at the
mouth of the Guadalquivir River . At this point the modern map shows a large
delta , composed of swamps, about thirty miles wide and fifty miles long. The bay
on the Ben Zara Map might seem thus to represent the coastline before the
growth of the delta of the Guadalquivir . Since the Guadalquivir is not an enormous
                                 THE ANCIENT MAPS           OF THE    NORTH 177
                                                                                    30 E
                                                                                         °



                                                                                         40 N°



                                                                                         38 N
                                                                                             °



                                                                                         36 N°
                                                           A
                      Figure 98. Modern map of the Aegean.


river , and does not carry huge loads of sediment, it would have taken a consider    -
able time indeed to build the delta . Several other maps we have examined carry
indications of delta -building since they were originally drawn, but in no other case
is the evidence so clear as this.
      Another matter of importance to us was to determine whether, in the remark     -
ably detailed representation of the islands, especially in the Aegean Sea , we might
not have evidence of a change of sea level since the original map was made.
Comparison of the Aegean Sea on this map ( Fig. 97) with the Aegean on a
modern map ( Fig. 98) suggests that many islands may have been submerged . There
arc many fewer islands on the modern map, and many of these are smaller than
they are shown to be on the old map. One may ask , if the mapmaker was so
conscientious in drawing in the smallest islands, and showing all the features of
the coast with the greatest accuracy possible, why in the Aegean should he suddenly
take leave of his senses, and fill the sea with imaginary islands, while still showing
the real islands in their correct positions?
178    Maps of the Ancient Sea Kings




      Figure 99. The Ibn Ben Zara Map, tracing of the western section .

     The reader will note that a corner of this map apparently shows the same
feature we have discussed as a possible ice cap in the Benincasa Map. We had to
admit that the evidence in that case was equivocal. Here, in this map, we have
more of the same sort of evidence, in the form of features suggesting glaciers in
central England and in central Ireland (see Fig. 99) .
     Here, at least , we can say the evidence all hangs together : the great lapse
of time required for building the delta of the Guadalquivir, the evidence of a
lower sea level at the time the map was drawn ( which we know did exist at the
end of the ice age), and now these remnant glaciers in the British Isles.
   o
    CHAP
   TER VII
     THE
SCIENTIFIC
   IMPLICA
, TIONS OF
     THE
    MAPS
                                    1. Spherical Trigonometry.

                        When we started our investigation of the ancient maps we
                  had a limited goal : We wanted to find out simply whether the
                  Antarctic Coast appeared on the Piri Re’is Map of 1513. This led
                  us to a probable solution of the Piri Re’is Projection . Wc found
                  that the projection of the source map used by Piri Re’is for his
                  Atlantic coasts ( both of the Old and of the New World ) had
                  apparently been based on plane trigonometry, and on the compu -
                  tation of the circumference of the earth ascribed to Eratosthenes.
                  We found an agreement between the length of the Greek stadium
                  implied in this projection , and its length as found by Dr . George
                  Sarton . We found the center of the projection to lie at the inter -
                  section of the Tropic of Cancer with the meridian of Alexandria ,
                  and wc found that the use of the meridian of Alexandria accorded
                  with the procedure adopted by ancient Greek geographers gener -
                  ally. We had the statement of Piri Re’is himself that some of his
                  source maps descended from the time of Alexander the Great .
                        Thus we had strong support for the conclusion that the
                  Piri Rc’is source map was of ancient vintage. It appeared to reflect
                  an unexpected level of scientific achievement in Alexandrian
                        —
                  science that is, it suggested that the geographers of the great
                  “ Museum ” or Academy attached to the Library of Alexandria
                  might have solved the problem of applying mathematics to map-
                        —
                  making something that all known geographers from Eratosthenes
                  to Ptolemy knew ought to be done but were unable to accomplish .
                  It would seem that this had been accomplished , however, before
                  the time of Ptolemy ( in the 2 nd Century A.D.) . It can hardly have
                  been done later. The only era of brilliance in science between the
days of Ptolemy and the modem period of the Renaissance was the great era of
Arab science from the 10th to the 13th Centuries, but the Arab maps reflect no
application of trigonometry to mapmaking . They arc only beautiful pictures.
     In Alexandrian times we found that not only had Hipparchus in the 2 nd
Century B .C. discovered or rediscovered plane and spherical trigonometry, but he
182      Maps of the Ancient Sea Kings
had also developed one or more types of mathematical map projections based
on spherical trigonometry. We do not know whether he drew maps perhaps he—
   —
did but the truth is that in his day he could not possibly have applied his projec-
tions to the globe because the necessary data , in the form of correct findings of
latitudes and longitudes of a very large number of places over the known areas of
the earth , were not available. This was the weakness of all Greek cartographic
science. In Greek times mathematics was in advance of mechanical instrumenta -
tion : There was no instrument for easily and correctly determining the longitude
of places. However, the Piri Re’is and the other maps we went on to study, seemed
to suggest that such an instrument or instruments had once existed , and had been
used by people who knew very closely the correct size of the earth . Moreover, it
looks as if this people had visited most of the earth . They seem to have been quite
well acquainted with the Americas, and to have mapped the coasts of Antarctica .

                       —               —
      A particularly difficult problem a very strange and even seemingly contra -
dictory sort of enigma was presented by the apparent use of plane trigonometry
at a time when , according to the historical record , spherical trigonometry was
 known . Why , in the Piri Re’is Projection , do we find evidence of the use of plane
trigonometry, as repeated experiments have indicated , when the Greek geographers
after Hipparchus were familiar with the theory of spherical trigonometry in map-
making? ( As far as we know, though , they could not make practical use of the
theory.) It does not seem very likely that the map was drawn at precisely that
period in the life of Hipparchus when he had completed the development of plane
trigonometry, but had not yet developed spherical trigonometry.
      The way to the solution of this particular enigma was pointed out first
by a curious fact that emerged from the Tables of the Piri Rc’is Map. We
found a very remarkable accuracy of longitude on this map; but , strangely,
latitude seemed rather less accurate. That is, for example, there was a regular and
progressive increase in latitude errors toward the north of Europe. It was as if the
original source map had been drawn in a way that took account of the curvature
of the earth . We were able to eliminate the possibility that this was merely the
 result of an error in scale. We found that the length of the degree of latitude on
the original source map had been longer than the length of the degree of longitude.
We were not able to determine whether the greater average length of the degree
of latitude was the result of an arbitrary ratio between the degrees of latitude and
longitude based on the ratio at a given parallel of latitude, or whether it was
 progressive , that is, whether the parallels grew gradually farther apart with distance
from the equator. In the first case, we would have the method ascribed to Ptolemy
 by Nordenskiold ;1 in the second, we would have something like the Mercator
projection , a projection based on spherical trigonometry ( Note 5).
      Another part of the Piri Re’is Map pointed to the use of spherical map

    1
        See Note 9.
                        THE SCIENTIFIC IMPLICATIONS             OF THE     MAPS 183
projections in remote times. This was the Caribbean sector, which suggested that
the original cartography may have been done on something like the azimuthal
equidistant polar projection . Furthermore, the accuracy of the latitudes and longi-
tudes in this sector strongly suggested that whoever converted one projection into
the other knew what he was doing and had correct longitudes and latitudes for the
Caribbean.

     As our studies extended from map to map we accumulated more and more
evidence of the ancient existence, in an era long before Greece, of spherical trigo-
nometry and its application to mapmaking. The Zeno Map of the North illustrated
the conversion of an originally spherical sort of projection to the flat portolano one.
     The antiquity of the knowledge of spherical trigonometry, and of its applica -
tion to mapmaking in sophisticated map projections became quite clear in the case
of the Oronteus Finaeus Map of Antarctica . Here no one had tried any conversion
of the ancient map to the portolan projection . Here our long and intensive exami-
nation slowly revealed that the original map must have been drawn on a projection
like the Cordiform projection known and used in the Renaissance. It was a projec-
tion with curved meridians. Our cartographic friends in the U.S. Air Force had
suggested such a projection, 2 but it is hardly possible to specify its precise character,
excepting that it is unthinkable that it could have been drawn without spherical
trigonometry. It is a fascinating fact that this map, according to geological clues,
appears to represent an antiquity greater than that of most of the other maps
an antiquity that may exceed several times over the antiquity of the oldest written
                                                                                       —
records hitherto known to us.
     The portolan charts of the Mediterranean and the Black Sea , dating appar-
ently from the 14th and 15th Centuries, were found by us to have an accuracy in
the ratio of latitude to longitude, that, according to Strachan ( Note 7), implied
 the use of spherical trigonometry.8 The De Canerio Map of 1502 threw much
additional light on this problem . In the first place, it incorporated a map of the
Mediterranean and Black Seas that was essentially the same as the common original
                                                  —
of the 14th and 15th Century portolan charts the map Nordenskiold referred to
as the “ normal portolano.” We sought to solve the projection of this map first by
plane trigonometry, finding, as with the Piri Re’is Map, extraordinary accuracy of
longitude, but progressively increasing errors of latitude with distance from the
equator . We tried different ways of resolving this problem . We applied the
Mercator projection in spreading the parallels, while leaving the meridians alone,

    2
      See Note 22.
    3
      That is, a sophisticated map projection was constructed by spherical trigo        -
nometry and then the geographical points were found on it, their locations in lati      -
tude and longitude having been ascertained by the use of instruments capable of
considerable precision.
184         Maps of the Ancient Sea Kings
a very artificial test . This did not work . Finally, we applied spherical trigonometry,
which did work . It is interesting that the use of spherical trigonometry appears
to have produced an oblong grid like the grids discovered empirically on the Piri
Re’is Map and the Chinese map of Yii Chi Thu.

                              2. The Twelve-Wind System.

      It appears that there may be a connecting link between the hypothetical body
of ancient maps we have discussed and the remote civilization from which they
may have been derived ; that link is the so-called “ twelve-wind system .” This system
appears to stem from the farthest antiquity.
     To begin with, scholars have long been aware of the fact that the type of
portolan design known as the “eight -wind system ” and used in the portolan charts
of the Middle Ages and the Renaissance was preceded , in antiquity, by another
type, the twelve-wind system, which we have discussed . No portolano based on the
twelve-wind system was known until we discovered that system in the Venetian
Chart of 1484.4 The presence of the twelve-wind system in this chart, plus the
fact that it proved to have been constructed by trigonometry, is good evidence of
its origin in antiquity.
      Now, from the standpoint of the history of science, the twelve-wind system
is of very special importance. This system involved , as we have previously pointed
out, the division of the circle into twelve arcs of 30 degrees each , or six arcs of
60 degrees. (See Fig. 69.) It involved the division of the circle into 360 degrees.
This fact relates the system , in most interesting fashion , to Babylonian science.
The Babylonians had a numbering system based on sixty, and on decimals. They
are supposed to have invented the 360-degree circle, and the divisions of time
we still use today.
      The Babylonians also had a zodiac, and this was divided into twelve signs
of 30 degrees each . The constellations of the zodiac did not precisely coincide with
the twelve signs, as was natural enough , since the latter were mathematical divisions.
      Now the stars were used in ancient times, in navigation , as E. G. R . Taylor
points out (199: 40), and so the zodiac and the other constellations of the northern
and southern hemispheres ( Note 21 ) were a sort of map written in the sky.8 The
relationships of the Babylonians and Phoenicians in ancient times were very close,
and we can easily imagine that the Phoenicians might have applied these basic
elements of Babylonian science to mapmaking. The result of any such effort would
 have been the twelve-wind system .
      We must not allow ourselves to be confused by the fact that the 360-degree

        4
            But see Note 16.
        5
            This idea was beautifully developed by a little-known 19th Century writer.
( 32)
                      THE SCIENTIFIC IMPLICATIONS           OF THE    MAPS 185
circle is used in modern navigation. This method of dividing the circle is not
modern ; it is the oldest way of dividing the circle known to man . Furthermore,
since it involves counting by tens, it alone can explain how the ancient source
map of the Antarctic, probably drawn ages before either Phoenicians or Babylonians
existed , had on it the circle that Oronteus Finaeus took for the Antarctic Circle,
but which we have shown may have been the 80th parallel . The implication
from this is that the 360-degree circle and the twelve-wind system were ancient
before the rise of Babylonia and long before Tyre and Sidon were built by the
Phoenicians. Babylonian science was thus, perhaps, a heritage from a much older
culture.
      There are curious connections and comparisons that can be made between the
ancient sciences of Greece, Egypt , Babylonia , and China , not to neglect either
India or Central America. I have assembled some passages referring to these con-
nections, showing particularly that both the Babylonians and the Chinese had
numbering systems that could fit in very well with decimals of the twelve-wind
system (see Note 17).

         3. The Age of the Cartographic Tradition: Geological Problems.

     It is necessary now to attempt to interpret such evidence as there is of the
antiquity of the cartographic tradition represented by our maps. The evidence is
geological in nature. We have, first, some indications of changes in shorelines since
the maps were made, but these are uncertain. It is possible to dismiss them simply
as bad mapmaking. Perhaps the most impressive example is the large bay shown
on the Ibn Ben Zara Map of Spain at the present location of the delta of the
Guadalquivir River. Here the indication is that a delta thirty miles wide and fifty
miles long has been built since the original map was drawn . This would, of course,
involve a great length of time. There are suggestions (also in the Ibn Ben Zara
Map) of a lowered sea level. Despite the extraordinary general accuracy of the
map many islands are shown in the Aegean Sea that do not now exist, and a
number of islands are shown larger than they are now. This again might be bad
mapmaking, but there is no necessity to adopt that conclusion . The case is the
same with the indications of remnants of ice age glaciers in Sweden , Germany,
England, and Ireland on the Benincasa and Ibn Ben Zara Maps and on the
Ptolemaic Map of the North . This evidence hangs together and points in the
               —
same direction towards a great antiquity for the beginnings of the cartographic
tradition .
     The most important evidence for the age of the maps, however, is to be found
in those showing the Antarctic, especially in the maps of Mercator, Piri Re’is, and
Oronteus Finaeus. All of these maps appear to show the continent at a time
when there was a temperate climate there. Some geological evidence, in the
form of three sedimentary cores from the bottom of the Ross Sea , has been
186       Maps of the Ancient Sea Kings
presented to suggest that such a warm period may indeed have existed there down
to about 6,000 years ago.
      Since this matter is now primarily a geological one, it may be advisable to
introduce the discussion with a brief description of the present conditions in the
Antarctic, a summary of the present geological ideas regarding the climatic history
of the continent, and the causes of ice ages generally.
      A glance at any good up-to-date map of the Antarctic will reveal that the
continent is entirely covered by ice. It was formerly thought that the central areas
were a very high plateau, covered by an ice cap about a mile thick. It has now
been discovered that there is no high central plateau, but instead the rock surface
of the continent is no farther elevated above sea level than the surfaces of North
America and Europe. The ice cap, therefore, is much thicker than formerly sup-
posed, and in places approaches two miles in depth . In some areas the rock surface
dips below sea level so that, if the ice were melted, very important inland lakes
or seas, and numerous bays, would appear.
      In discussing the history of this great ice cap, geologists first of all say that
                                   —
it has existed for millions of years since Miocene or even Pliocene times. If their
views are correct it is extremely unlikely that man could have mapped Antarctica
when its coasts were free of ice. Man as we know him probably did not exist then .®
      Present geological opinions, however, may not be correct. There is, in the
first place, quite a mystery about the ancient climate of Antarctica . One might
suppose that since the presence of the ice seems to be due to the fact that the
continent is located at the South Pole, the climate there must have been glacial
since the beginning of the geological record, that is, for about two billion years.
But nothing is farther from the truth. A few years ago I summarized the known
evidence on this matter as follows:
     . . . Those who may be inclined to disbelieve that Antarctica could have pos-
sessed a warm climate 10,000 years ago7 must be reminded of the evidence that
Antarctica has many times possessed such a climate.
     So far as we know at present, the very first evidence of an ice age in Antarctica
comes from the Eocene Epoch . That was about 60,000,000 years ago. Before that,
for one and a half billion years, there is no suggestion of polar conditions, though
very much earlier ice ages existed in other parts of the earth ( 85: 59).
     I quoted from Thomas R. Henry, author of The White Continent , a summary
of evidence showing that in the Edsel Ford Mountains in Antarctica there are
folded layers of sedimentary rock 15,000 feet thick that must have been deposited
by flowing rivers when the continent was ice-free:

      ®
        So far, creatures of a human type, who may have had more intelligence than
they are credited with, have been traced back to about 1,700,000 years ago. Very
little, however, is known with certainty about the origins of man.
      7
        As suggested by the Hough cores.
                       THE SCIENTIFIC IMPLICATIONS           OF THE    MAPS 187
     The greater part of the erosion probably took place when Antarctica was
essentially free of ice since the structure of the rocks indicates strongly that the
original sediments from which they were formed were carried by water.8 Such
an accumulation calls for an immensely long period of tepid peace in the life of
the rampaging planet. (85: 59)

Another writer on ancient climates has described the evidence of warm coralline
seas stretching right across Antarctica several hundred million years ago. (85: 245)
      A reasonable deduction from this evidence presented in my earlier book ,
Earth’ s Shifting Crust (1958), is that Antarctica may not have been at the South
Pole in the periods when the continent was warm. There are at least three ways
of accounting for this possibility. One is to suppose a change in the position of
the earth’s axis of rotation . A second is to suppose that the continents are not
fixed rigidly to the body of the earth , but rest on semi-molten non -crystalline
rock over which they may gradually wander , and the third suggestion is that the
whole crust of the earth may be displaced at times, moving over the soft inner
body, much as the skin of an orange, if it were loose, might shift over the inner
part of the orange, all in one piece.
      When I was writing Earth’ s Shifting Crust I considered these alternative ideas.
The objections to the theory of changes of axis were formidable indeed . It seemed
that no force on the earth could account for such a thing, and any force acting
on the earth from interstellar space (such as collision with another body ) would
probably destroy all terrestrial life.
      The theory of continental drift was first proposed by Alfred Wegener in 1912.
He had long been perplexed by finding fossil evidence of plants and animals in
places far removed from the climatic zones where similar species exist today. He
supposed that the continents had originally constituted one land block which
was broken up into pieces that gradually drifted apart. His suggestion of the force
that might have done this and sent the continents drifting was not acceptable to
physicists, however, and as a result his theory was accepted only by a minority
of scientists, most of whom were biologists. In the last few years it has been given
a new lease on life by the suggestion of a new “ mechanism ” to account for the
drift . This is the contribution of the Canadian physicist, H . Tuzo Wilson, and is
based on the supposed effects of sub-crustal convection currents of molten rock
moving in the depths of the earth ( 218) .
      Only one aspect of the revived continental drift theory may concern us here :
the rate at which the sub-crustal currents are thought to move. Wilson estimates
it at about one centimeter a year, or one meter a century. This would be one
kilometer (about two thirds of a mile ) in 100,000 years. Since, according to


    8
      Naturally there are no flowing rivers now in Antarctica, for everything is
frozen , except for a little melting in a few places during the Antarctic summer.
188 Maps of the Ancient Sea Kings
Wilson, it is the sub-crustal currents that move the continents, continental drift
must be very slow.
     Wegener advanced the continental drift theory to explain not only the distri-
bution of fossil species but also the occurrence of ice ages, and it is clear that the
revived theory may well explain glacial periods that occurred hundreds of millions
of years ago (such as those of the Permo-Carboniferous Period ) because a continent
can drift a long way (a thousand miles, perhaps) in a hundred million years. But
this does not help us with recent ice ages. There have been four of these in North
America within the last million years. The last one, which ended only about 8,000
years ago, apparently reached its apogee (or maximum ) only 10,000 years before
it disappeared .9 Hence, the vast climatic change that melted a continental glacier
covering four million square miles of North America probably took place in no
more than 10,000 years. From a geological standpoint this is incredibly rapid .
It has not been accounted for by any hypothesis accepted by geologists. The puzzle
of the ice ages remains one of the unsolved problems of geology.10
     In Earth’ s Shifting Crust , I attempted, with the help of my collaborator,
                                                                ——
James Campbell, to state the case for the third alternative the displacement of
the earth’s whole crust as one piece over the inner layers and to suggest a
mechanism to account for it. The book was written to explain, among other things,
the most recent ice age in North America . I felt that if we could find an acceptable
explanation for this ice age, which is the ice age we know most about, we would
be more likely to be on the right track regarding the ice ages of long ago, about
which we know very little. This procedure accorded with the sound principle of
working from the known to the unknown .
     Campbell and I started with the assumption that the earth’s crust rests upon
a very weak layer below, a layer that is virtually liquid . Then , adopting a suggestion
made by the engineer Hugh Auchincloss Brown we considered that a force suf -
ficient to displace the whole crust over this weak layer might be provided by the
centrifugal effects of the ice caps themselves. In Antarctica , for example, the
center of mass of the great ice cap is, because of the shape of the continent, about
300 miles from the pole. As the earth rotates, the eccentricity creates a centrifugal
effect that works horizontally on the crust, tending to displace it toward the
equator. Campbell calculated the mathematical effects being produced theoretically
by the Antarctic ice cap at the present time, and found that they were approxi-
mately of the right magnitude to lead to failure and fracturing of the crust . Such
failure could , in turn, lead to a shifting of the entire crust of the earth . The
hypothesis of such a mechanism to account for crust displacement is attractive

     9
        See Chapter II of “ Earth’s Shifting Crust.”
    10
        A recent theory proposed by Professors Ewing and Donn , of Columbia Uni-
versity and City College respectively, has called attention to a possible contributory
factor in the recent ice ages, but has serious weaknesses.
                       THE SCIENTIFIC IMPLICATIONS           OF THE    MAPS 189
because the mechanism would provide a continuing force that could displace the
crust a great distance and would also explain why the displacements would stop
short of moving glaciated continents all the way to the equator. The ice caps, as
they were moved farther from the pole, would displace the crust over a great
distance because their centrifugal effects would increase. The movement of the
crust, however, would eventually stop because the ice caps would melt away in
the temperate zones.11
      Applying this theory to the last ice age in North America , Campbell and I
supposed that at the peak of the glacial period the ice accumulation was sufficient
to start a crustal displacement . The effect would be to pull North America south-
ward toward the equator, and the movement would continue until Hudson Bay
or the Province of Quebec, which were at the center of the ice cap, and which
had been , according to our theory, at the North Pole, reached their present lati-
tudes. At this point the ice cap would be sufficiently reduced by melting to bring
the movement to a stop. The crust would have been displaced 2,000 miles along
the 90 th meridian of West Longitude.
      But now, if North America had been brought about 2,000 miles southward,
what about the rest of the Western Hemisphere? Since the whole crust would have
moved as one unit, obviously the whole hemisphere would have been displaced by
the same amount. Thus South America would also move southward. East Asia ,
on the other side of the earth , would move, naturally, in the opposite direction-
northward . A good part of Earth’ s Shifting Crust is devoted to presenting evidence
showing that the climate grew drastically colder in Siberia at this particular time.
      We come to Antarctica . It is clear, of course, that if the Western Hemisphere
shifted 2,000 miles southward along the 90th meridian , Antarctica must have
moved correspondingly. Hence, it must have been 2,000 miles to the north before
the displacement. This would have put it outside the Antarctic Circle, in a tem-
perate or cold - temperate climate. During the movement it would gradually have
grown colder, an ice cap forming and developing slowly until it reached its present
dimensions.
      The Oronteus Finaeus Map, as we interpret it, shows most of the coasts
without ice. But the inland waterways, connecting the Ross, Bellingshausen and
Weddell Seas, are not shown . This may mean that glaciation was well advanced
in some parts of Antarctica when the original maps were made. On the other hand ,
it seems that rivers may still have been flowing from the mountains near the coasts,
and that the estuaries along the shores of the Ross Sea (despite its present closeness
to the Pole) were not yet filled with ice. Antarctica apparently had not yet really
frozen up. If we accept the Ross Sea cores as valid evidence, we may conclude that
 its shores were covered by the ice cap by about 6,000 years ago. We can hardly

    11
       For the best brief summary of the theory see the Foreword written by Albert
Einstein for “ Earth’s Shifting Crust ” ( Note 18).
190    Maps of the Ancient Sea Kings
imagine that the sailors and mapmakers of our ancient hypothetical world -encircling
lost civilization were visiting the Ross Sea in the stormy and frigid period when
the continent was entering the ice age. Hence, it does not seem unreasonable to
allow at least 2,000 years for the final transition from the picture shown by the
Oronteus Finaeus Map to the present conditions. Indeed , it would perhaps more
likely have involved a period twice or three times as long.
      It seems, then, that the cartographic tradition of the ancient maps may well
extend back in time at least to the period when the glaciers were withdrawing in
the Northern Hemisphere. For this reason we should not lightly dismiss the sugges-
tions of late glacial conditions in the maps of Ptolemy, Benincasa , and Ibn Ben Zara .
  c
 CHAP
TER VIII
   A
CIVILIZA
  TION
  THAT
VANISHED
                       The evidence presented by the ancient maps appears to
                 suggest the existence in remote times, before the rise of any of
                 the known cultures, of a true civilization, of a comparatively
                 advanced sort, which either was localized in one area but had
                 worldwide commerce, or was, in a real sense, a worldwide culture.
                 This culture, at least in some respects, may well have been more
                 advanced than the civilizations of Egypt, Babylonia, Greece, and
                 Rome. In astronomy, nautical science, mapmaking and possibly
                 ship-building, it was perhaps more advanced than any state of
                 culture before the 18th Century of the Christian Era . It was in
                 the 18th Century that we first developed a practical means of
                 finding longitude. It was in the 18th Century that we first accu-
                 rately measured the circumference of the earth . Not until the
                 19th Century did we begin to send out ships for purposes of
                 whaling or exploration into the Arctic or Antarctic Seas. The maps
                 indicate that some ancient people may have done all these things.
                       Mapping on such a scale as this suggests both economic
                 motivations and economic resources. Organized government is
                 indicated . The mapping of a continent like Antarctica implies
                 much organization, many exploring expeditions, many stages in
                 the compilation of local observations and local maps into a gen -
                 eral map, all under a central direction . Furthermore, it is unlikely
                 that navigation and mapmaking were the only sciences developed
                 by this people, or that the application of mathematics to cartogra -
                 phy was the only practical application they made of their mathe-
                  matical knowledge.
                       Whatever its attainments may have been , however, this civi-
lization disappeared , perhaps suddenly, more likely by gradual stages. Its disappear-
ance has implications we ought to consider seriously. If I may be permitted a little
philosophizing, I would like to suggest that there are four principal conclusions
to which we are led .
     .
     1 The idea of the simple linear development of society from the culture of
the paleolithic (Old Stone Age) through the successive stages of the neolithic ( New
Stone Age), Bronze, and Iron Ages must be given up . Today we find primitive
194    Maps of the Ancient Sea Kings
cultures co-existing with advanced modern society on all the continents the
Bushmen of Australia , the Bushmen of South Africa , truly primitive peoples in
                                                                               —
South America , and in New Guinea; some tribal peoples in the United States.
We shall now assume that, some 20,000 or more years ago, while paleolithic peoples
held out in Europe, more advanced cultures existed elsewhere on the earth , and
that we have inherited a part of what they once possessed , passed down from
people to people.
     2. Every culture contains the seeds of its own disintegration . At every moment
forces of progress and of decay co-exist, building up or tearing down. All too
evidently the destructive forces have often gained the upper hand ; witness such
known cases as the extinctions of the high cultures of ancient Crete, Troy, Babylon ,
Greece, and Rome, to which it would be easy to add twenty others. And , it is worth
noting that Crete and Troy were long considered myths.
     3. Every civilization seems eventually to develop a technology sufficient for
its own destruction, and hitherto has made use of the same. There is nothing
magical about this. As soon as men learned to build walls for defense, other men
learned how to tear them down . The vaster the achievements of a civilization ,
the farther it spreads, the greater must be the engines of destruction; and so today,
to counter the modern worldwide spread of civilization , we have atomic means to
destroy all life on earth . Simple. Logical.
     4. The more advanced the culture, the more easily it will be destroyed , and
the less evidence will remain . Take New York. Suppose it was destroyed by a
hydrogen bomb. After some 2,000 years, how much of its life could anthropologists
reconstruct? Even if quite a few books survived , it would be quite impossible to
reconstruct the mental life of New York.

     When I was a youth I had a plain simple faith in progress. It seemed to me
impossible that once man had passed a milestone of progress in one way that he
could ever pass the same milestone again the other way. Once the telephone was
invented it would stay invented . If past civilizations had faded away it was just
because they had not learned the secret of progress. But Science meant permanent
progress, with no going back, and each generation was pressing on further and
further, rolling back the frontiers of the unknown . This process would go on
forever.
     Most people still feel this way, even in spite of two world wars, and the
threat of universal annihilation in a third . The two world wars shook the faith of
many in progress, but even without the very sad story of the century we live in,
there never was any good basis for the belief that progress is an automatic
process. Progress or decline in civilization is just a balance sheet between what the
human race creates in a given period and what it destroys. Sometimes for a while
our race creates more than it destroys, and there is “ progress”; then for a while
                           —                              —
it destroys more effectively more scientifically, let us say than it creates, and we
                                        A CIVILIZATION THAT VANISHED 195
 have decline. Compare, for example, the time it took for saturation bombing by
 the American and British Air Forces in World War II to destroy most of the cities
of Germany, including golden Dresden, and its priceless heritage of medieval archi-
 tecture, with the time it took to build those cities. Think of the destruction , in
one instant, by American bombers, of the oldest monastery in the West, the Abbey
of Monte Cassino.
      But the sad story of destruction , whereby man destroys almost as much as
he creates (even in the best of times), does not begin with the 20th Century.
Consider the question of libraries. There is something particularly upsetting about
 the burning of a library. Somehow it symbolizes the whole process. The ancient
world of Rome and Greece had many libraries. The most famous of these was the
Library of Alexandria , founded in Egypt by Alexander the Great three centuries
before the Christian Era. Five hundred years later it is said to have contained
about one million volumes, and into it was gathered the entire knowledge of the
                       —
ancient western world the technology, the science, the literature, and the histori-
cal records.
      This library, the heritage of untold ages, was burned . The details are not very
well known , but we think there were at least three burnings. The first happened
when Julius Caesar captured Alexandria . The citizens resisted him , and in the
battle about a third of the Library was destroyed . Caesar is said to have called a
public meeting of the citizens and lectured them, sadistically accusing them of
                                —
being guilty of the destruction because they had resisted him! In his view Rome
had a perfect right to conquer Egypt, and so the Alexandrians were guilty of mis-
conduct in resisting him . This is the way people still think today.


                                    —           —
      There is evidence that most of the library restored and enormously enlarged
after the time of Julius Caesar was destroyed by a Christian mob, inflamed

      —                                                                 —
by the preaching of a fanatical bishop, who pointed out to them rightly, of
course that the library was no more than a repository of heathen teachings, and
therefore a veritable timebomb, ticking away, preparing an explosion that could
wreck the Christian world . But how can we afford to point the finger at the igno-
rant mob? We have had our book-burnings in the 20 th Century. And I don’t refer
only to Hitler’s infamous Burning of the Books. The libraries of America are
combed relentlessly by gimlet -eyed agents of various self -appointed saviors of
morality and religion. The books just disappear off the shelves! Thousands of them,
every year! And , of course, American libraries have recently been the particular
objects of anti-American mobs in several countries. ( 59, 100, 159, 189, 205)
     The final chapter in the destruction of the Library of Alexandria was a burn -
ing carried out by the Arabs after their conquest of Egypt in the 7th Century.
There are two stories. According to one, the conquering Caliph said, on being
asked what to do with the library, that anything in it contrary to Islamic teaching
should be destroyed , and everything else was in the Koran already. The library
was therefore entirely destroyed (100:95-97). The other version is that the hot,
196 Maps of the Ancient Sea Kings
dusty, dirty Arab legions, just out of the desert, found the enormous Roman baths
of the capital city ready for use, but out of fuel for heating the water, and that the
parchments from the library furnished the fuel . Sad as this reason for the destruc-
tion was, it was at least morally more justifiable than the others.
     The Romans were guilty of another destruction of a library, which is impor-
tant for our story . In the year 146 B .C. they burned the great city of Carthage, their
ancient enemy and their incalculable superior in everything relating to science.
The library of Carthage is said to have contained about 500,000 volumes, and these
no doubt dealt with the history and the sciences of Phoenicia as a whole.
     If the reader asks, how much of the total of ancient knowledge was lost by
these and innumerable other acts of destruction, we will say 90 per cent or more.
A few facts may give him a general idea . The most famous scientist of ancient
times was Aristotle; his thought dominated the world for fifteen hundred years.
He wrote many works, and it might be thought that these works, at least, would
have been preserved from destruction . Not so. Only one work of his survives, the
Constitution of Athens. All his other so-called “works” are only edited and re-
edited versions of his students’ notes. As I think of the kind of notes most of
my students take in lectures, I shudder through and through , and wonder how
much of Aristotle’s real thought really does survive. Furthermore, Aristotle wrote
many literary works that were considered marvels of style. All of these are lost.
     Plato is an equally famous figure in the history of civilization . His dialogues,
including his great Republic, have survived . But how many know that these were
only his popular works? Every one of those he regarded as his serious scientific and
technical works has been lost. With the great Greek tragedians, Aeschylus,
                                                                            —
Euripides, Sophocles, the story is the same. We possess only a handful about 10
        —
per cent of the plays they wrote.
     What we have, then , of ancient cultural products is only a sample and not
necessarily a representative sample either. On the contrary, whole aspects of ancient
culture have been consigned to oblivion . What fragments we have come from
books considered of value to the people who dominated the Church and State
in the centuries after the dissolution of the ancient civilization . The churchmen
                                                                —
were interested in moral questions; the educated laymen mostly aristocrats
continued to devote themselves to the great classics of arts and literature. Science,
                                                                                     —
however, was neglected .
     But if it is true that we have lost so much , still we have preserved much more
than some people suppose. When I began this work I was aware of no definite
evidence for the existence of an ancient advanced world civilization , though I
was aware that others believed it had existed . Now that I have found , in the maps,
evidence I accept as decisive in answering this question in the affirmative, I see
additional evidence on every hand.

    The reader will quite naturally wonder how, if once a great civilization existed
over most of the earth , it could disappear leaving no traces except these maps?
                                        A CIVILIZATION THAT VANISHED 197
For an answer to this we must cite one of the best known principles of human
psychology : We find what we look for . I do not mean by this that we never find
anything by accident. But rather, we usually overlook, neglect, and pass by facts
unless we have a motive to notice them . It was Darwin who said that to make
new discoveries one had to have a theory ( not a fixed dogmatic theory, of course,
but an experimental hypothesis). With the theory of evolution people began to
look in new directions, and they found new facts, by the thousands, which sup-
ported and verified the theory. The same thing had happened a half -century
before with the geological theory of Sir Charles Lyell. It happened in the begin-
ning of modern astronomy, when Copernicus proposed a new theory of the solar
system . Hitherto people have not seriously believed that an advanced civilization
could have preceded the civilizations now known to us. The evidences have been,
therefore, neglected.
     But if we take a glance at the history of archaeological research in the 19th
Century we see that it consists mainly of the rediscovery of lost civilizations.
Jaquetta Hawkes, in her fascinating anthology of the writings of some of the
principal archaeologists of all periods (86), devotes a section to “ Lost Civilizations.’’
     The story begins in Mesopotamia , about 1811, when Claudius Rich began
the rediscovery of Babylon . It continued with Paul Emile Botta , Henry Layard ,
and Henry Rawlinson who brought Assyria back into history. Egypt came back
into history after Champollion solved the problem of Egyptian hieroglyphics, and
in the fourth quarter of the century, Schliemann brought Troy out of the mists
of legend , and Sir Arthur Evans gave substance to the myths of Crete. More re-
cently still an advanced culture, with strangely modern luxuries, that flourished on
the banks of the Indus River 5,000 years ago has joined the ranks of lost civiliza -
tions rediscovered .
     But is this all? Is the process at an end ? Are no more lost civilizations waiting
to be discovered ? It would be contrary to history itself if this were the case. Un -
imaginative people made fun of all these discoveries in turn and often hounded the
discoverers. The same sort of person today accepts all that has been discovered
in the past , but denies there is anything more to be discovered .
     Let us start our review of the evidences with Egypt . Scholars are in disagree-
ment about the particular achievements of the Egyptians in science, but they are
in good agreement about some particular aspects of them . Egyptian knowledge
of astronomy and geometry as early as the Fourth Dynasty has been shown to be
remarkable. The Egyptians had a double calendar which has been described as
“ the most scientific combination of calendars that has yet been used by man’’
(77:7). This calendar system may have been in use as early as 4241 B .C. One his-
torian of science writes:

     It may be, as some indeed suspect, that the science we see at the dawn of
recorded history was not science at its dawn but represents the remnants of the
science of some great and as yet untraced civilization . (77:12)
198 Maps of the Ancient Sea Kings
     Some of the scientific knowledge possessed by ancient peoples can hardly
be accounted for in view of the crudeness of the scientific instruments they are
supposed to have possessed . The Mayans, for example, are supposed to have meas-
ured the length of the tropical year with incredible precision . Their figure was
365.2420 days, as against our figure of 365.2423 days. They are also supposed to
have measured the length of a lunation , with an error of less than .0004 of a day
(10 :150). How did they achieve these results?
     George Rawlinson, in a discussion of Babylonian science, made the statement :
“The exact length of the Chaldean year is said to have been 365 days, 6 hours, and
11 minutes, which is an excess of two seconds only over the true length of the
sidereal year ” (173:11, 576) . He also remarked, “There is said to be distinct evidence
that they [ the Chaldeans ] observed the four satellites of Jupiter and strong reason to
believe that they were acquainted likewise with the seven satellites of Saturn . . . .”
(173:11,577)
     This knowledge may, of course, have been derived by the Mayans, the Baby-
lonians, the Egyptians by the use of instruments or methods of which we know
nothing. But it is at least possible that such knowledge came to them as a heritage
from the same ancient unknown people who made our maps.
     The fact that vast areas of ancient science have remained unknown to us
has recently been revealed in startling fashion by the discovery of a computer
designed and built in ancient times. It was found by divers in 1901 in the wreck
of a Greek galley that had been sunk off the Greek island of Antikythera in the
1st Century B .C. Transported to the National Museum at Athens, and carefully
cleaned over a long period of time, it was finally examined by Professor Derek de
Solla Price of Yale. He found it to be a planetarium, a machine to show the
risings and settings of the known planets, and therefore very complicated . But
what was particularly astonishing about it was the sophistication of the gearing
system , which , Dr. Price said, was essentially modern .
      It is obvious, of course, that if this great tradition of technical and mechanical
knowledge was lost to history, the same could well have happened to geographical
and cartographical knowledge possessed by the Greeks, whether discovered by them
or inherited from older peoples.
     Perhaps it should be noted here in passing that the loss of ancient scientific
knowledge was not confined to the period of the fall of ancient civilization . The
Arabs preserved much of it, and much of it was undoubtedly passed on to medieval
Europe. Perhaps we hear echoes of some of it in the remarkable mechanical ideas
of the medieval monk Roger Bacon , or even in some of the ideas of Leonardo
da Vinci. A considerable loss seems to have occurred in the Renaissance itself .
This was partly because of the invention of printing. The printing presses in the
15th and 16th Centuries were monopolized by two classes of books : religious
tracts (Catholic and Protestant), and humanist books dealing with arts and letters.
Science was of very little interest at the time, and scientific manuscripts just lay
                                      A CIVILIZATION THAT VANISHED 199
about and were allowed to rot away. Lord Francis Bacon is supposed to have drawn
attention to this deplorable neglect of scientific documents.
      I am aware of a good many other indications of this kind , scattered all over
the world , suggesting the ancient tradition of an advanced culture, but as yet
their investigation is so incomplete that there is no point in mentioning them .1
There is one matter, however, which I cannot forbear to mention , despite its
 rather controversial character, because I did investigate it myself .
      Just outside Mexico City there is a round step pyramid , which , long ago,
was swamped by lava from a volcano not far off . This is the pyramid of Cuicuilco.
The pyramid is not a mere mound, but a complex stone structure reflecting a
comparatively advanced society. The lava flow swirled around three sides of the
pyramid and covered about sixty square miles of territory to a depth of from five
to thirty feet. The layer of volcanic rock thus formed is called the Pedrigal .
      Geologists who examined the Pedrigal and tried to estimate, by the condition
of its surface and the amount of loose sediment accumulated over it , how long
ago it was formed, came up with a figure of about 7,000 years. This would have
meant that the Mexican pyramid was older by far than the pyramids of Egypt, the
oldest of which date back about 5,000 years. Archaeologists could not accept this,
and generally took the view that the pyramid probably dated no earlier than the
7th or 8th Centuries A.D. The development of the new technique of radiocarbon
dating after World War II threw new light on this question .
      Radiocarbon dating was developed by the nuclear scientist Willard F. Libby,
of the University of Chicago. It was based on the discovery that a very small per-
centage of the carbon contained in the carbon dioxide of the atmosphere is radio-
active, and, like all radioactive substances, loses mass at a measurable rate. Radio-
active carbon ( Carbon 14) radiates away half its mass in about 5,000 years. All
living things taking carbon dioxide from the air will, during their lifetimes, contain
the same percentage of radiocarbon as the atmosphere, but after their death any
new supply from the atmosphere is cut off , while the amount already absorbed
continues to decay. After a time the percentage of radiocarbon in the body of
the plant or animal will be less than that in the atmosphere, and by accurately
measuring the difference it becomes possible to determine the lapse of time since
the death of the plant or animal. This gives us a method of “absolute dating” for
archaeological and geological materials. Despite many complexities, it is regarded
as generally dependable, within a certain margin of error, for the period of the last
forty thousand years.



    1
       Two recent developments of great interest have provided new evidence of
scientific achievements in what we refer to as the Stone Ages. One consists of evi  -
dence of the use of an advanced lunar calendar as far back as 35,000 years ago (133),
and the other is the discovery, by the use of a computer, that the builders of Stone
henge were really good astronomers. (87 88 )
                                                                                    -
                                         -
200       Maps of the Ancient Sea Kings
      The first radiocarbon date for the Cuicuilco Pyramid was found by Dr . Libby
(124). He used a sample of charcoal found under the Pedrigal in direct associa -
tion with pottery fragments similar in style to the pottery of the known “ Archaic
Period ” of the Indian civilization of Mexico. The result was a finding of an age
of 2,422 years, with a margin of error of 250 years either way. It appeared from this
that the carbon came from a tree that died or was destroyed some time between
209 B.C. and 709 B.C. It was not certain , however, that this dated the lava flow, for
the charcoal was not directly associated with the lava. The wood might have been
burned by humans ( perhaps for cooking) sometime before the lava flow. But the
position of the charcoal directly under the lava suggested that no great period of
time may have elapsed between the burning of the wood and the lava flow.
      Additional radiocarbon dates subsequently amplified our information on
Cuicuilco. Between 1957 and 1962 a number of samples of charcoal , collected
from different depths beneath the Pedrigal, were dated in the radiocarbon labora -
tory of the University of Southern California ( UCLA ) .2 One of these samples
was directly associated with the lava, and gave an age of about 414 A.D., but was
considered by the archaeologists, in the light of other evidence, to be probably
about 200 years older. The consensus of specialists was that the flow probably
occurred about 200 A .D.
      This would appear at first to demolish the claim that the pyramid was very
old . It would appear that it might have been built by the same people who built
the other pyramids near Mexico City. There is, however, another aspect of the
matter which would appear to have been overlooked . It seems that the archaeolo-
gists who have discussed the date of Cuicuilco have not, in some cases, attentively
read the text of the report made by the man who excavated the pyramid for the
Government of Mexico in 1920. He was Byron S. Cummings, an American
archaeologist .3
      Cummings dug down through the Pedrigal, below which he found a stratum
of earth with fragments of pottery and figurines of the Archaic culture. He then
dug further. At the bottom of the Archaic layer he found a deposit of volcanic ash .
He extended his excavation down through the ash , and below it found evidences
of an entirely different culture, one that must have preceded the Archaic. He
considered that the evidence of the pottery and figurines here showed a level of
culture higher than the Archaic, but unconnected with it. As he sank his trenches

      2
                       Supplement of the American Journal of Science, Vol. 5,
          “ Radiocarbon ,”
pp. 12-13, and Vol. 6, pp. 332-334.
     3
       Cummings was assisted in his excavation of the pyramid by Dr. Manuel
Gamio and by Jose Ortiz of the “ Direccion de Anthropologia ,” the anthropology
office of the Mexican Government. Funds were provided by the National Geo-
graphic Society of Washington, D.C. Cummings’ report was published in 1933
by the University of Arizona Press, Tucson ( 56) .
                                      A CIVILIZATION THAT VANISHED 201

deeper , he came to the bottom of this layer , and to another layer of volcanic ash .
                                                                —
He dug through this, and came upon another layer of artifacts fragments of pot-
tery and figurines. These resembled those in the second layer, but they were cruder.
Finally, at a depth of eighteen feet, Cummings came upon a pavement that had
surrounded the Pyramid of Cuicuilco and which had evidently been built when
the pyramid was built.
      Cummings made an estimate of the time required to accumulate the eighteen
feet of sediment between the underside of the Pedrigal and the temple pavement.
He estimated , first, the age of the Pedrigal lava flow at 2,000 years, and here came
very close to the truth. Then he measured the thickness of the sediments that
have accumulated on the top of the Pedrigal since it was formed, and used this
as a measuring stick to estimate the time required to accumulate the sediments
below. He came to an estimate of 6, 500 years for the time required to accumulate
these eighteen feet of sediments.
      In answer to the argument that the rate of accumulation of the sediments
may have been different and more rapid in the period before the eruption of the
volcano, Cummings pointed out that a great lapse of time was clearly indicated
by the nature of the sediments themselves. The three culture layers are separated
by two layers of volcanic ash, and over each layer of ash is a thick layer of sterile
soil, with no indication of vegetation . In each case the development of a new
layer of humus-rich top soil over the sterile layer probably took time on the order
of centuries, and only after this process was completed did a new layer of artifacts
appear. The evidence, according to Cummings, suggested that, first, the pyramid
was abandoned , for some reason , by the people who built it; then , much later,
a crude people with crude pots and tools occupied the region around the pyramid .
After a lapse of time, an eruption of one or more of the neighboring volcanoes
eliminated the occupation , depositing a layer of volcanic ash . A further consider -
able period elapsed , new top soil was formed , and the area was again occupied ,
this time by an advanced people whose artifacts suggested they were the descend -
ants of the people preceding them . A process of cultural development would appear
to have taken place in some other region perhaps nearby. Again , after a consider-
able time, another eruption of the volcanoes seems to have eliminated this ad -
vanced culture, and this time resulted in a complete culture break , for the third
people to occupy the region , those of the Archaic culture, appear to have had
no connection with their predecessors. Only after all these things had taken place
was the Pedrigal formed .
      A check on Cummings’ estimate of 6, 500 years, for the time required to ac-
cumulate all the sediments, is provided by the radiocarbon samples referred to
above. They were taken at various depths below the Pedrigal, though at a distance
of about 1 ,000 feet from the pyramid . They all consisted of charcoal . Arranged in
the order of depth below the lava , their approximate dates were as follows:
202        Maps of the Ancient Sea Kings




                              Table A: Cuicuilco Radiocarbon Dates

                                                                            Margin
              Sample Numbers              Depth ( Approx .)      Age        <± Yrs.)
          UCLA-228, Cuicuilco A-2           Associated         414 A.D.       65
                                             with lava

          UCLA-205, Cuicuilco B-l           4 ft.   6 in.      160 A .D.      75

          UCLA-206, Cuicuilco B-2           7 ft.   6 in.       15 A .D.      80

          UCLA-602, Cuicuilco B-l 7         7 ft.   6 in.      240 B.C. *     80

          UCLA-208, Cuicuilco B-4           7 ft.   8 in.      150 B.C.      150

          UCLA-603, Cuicuilco B-l 8         7 ft. 11 in.       280 B.C.       80

          UCLA-207, Cuicuilco B-3           8 ft.   1 in.      650 B.C. *     70

          UCLA-209, Cuicuilco B-5           8 ft.   8 in.      350 B.C.       70

          UCLA-594, Cuicuilco B-9          14 ft.   3 in.      610 B.C.       80

          UCLA-210, Cuicuilco B-6          15 ft.   0 in.     2030 B.C. *     60

          UCLA-595, Cuicuilco B-10         15 ft. 0 in.        540 B.C.      100

          UCLA-596, Cuicuilco B-l 1        15 ft.   4 in.      610 B.C.      100

          UCLA-597, Cuicuilco B-l 2        16 ft.   8 in.     1870 B.C.      100

          UCLA -598, Cuicuilco B-l 3       16 ft.   8 in.     1870 B.C.      100

          UCLA-211, Cuicuilco B-7          17 ft. 6 in.       4765 B.C. *     90

          UCLA-212, Cuicuilco B-8          19 ft.   0 in.     2100 B.C.       75

          UCLA-600, Cuicuilco B-l 5        20 ft.   8 in.     1980 B.C.      100

          UCLA-599, Cuicuilco B-l 4        21 ft.   6 in.     1900 B.C.      200

          UCLA-601, Cuicuilco B-l 6        21 ft.   6 in.     2160 B.C.      120



      *   Samples UCLA-602, 207, 210, and 211 anomalous.
                                       A CIVILIZATION THAT VANISHED 203
If we disregard the samples out of chronological order ( UCLA-602, 207, 210, 211 ),
which suggest disturbances in the sediments through digging operations (or other
causes) in ancient times, and compare the accumulation of sediments with the
lapse of time between each pair of consecutive samples, we find there are very
wide variations in the rate of accumulation.

                           Table B: Rate of Sedimentation

        Sample Numbers        Accumulation          Time        Rate ( Approx.)

              -
         UCLA 228, 205         4 ft. 6 in.         254 yrs.       l ': 56 yrs.

         UCLA-205, 206         3 ft. 0 in.         145 yrs.       l ': 48 yrs.

              -
         UCLA 206, 208         0 ft. 2 in.         165 yrs.       1 ': 990 yrs.

             -
         UCLA 208, 603         0 ft. 3 in.         130 yrs.       l ': 520 yrs.

         UCLA-603, 209         0 ft. 9 in.          70 yrs.       l ' : 93 yrs .
         UCLA-209, 594         5 ft. 7 in.         260 yrs.       1 ': 48   yrs.

         UCLA-594, 596         1 ft. 1 in  .        00            0 : 00

         UCLA-596, 597         1   ft. 4 in.     1 ,260 yrs.      l ': 948 yrs.

         UCLA-597, 212         2   ft. 4 in.       230 yrs.       1 ':100 yrs.

         UCLA-212, 601         2 ft. 6 in.          60 yrs  .     l ':25 yrs.

     If we accept the dates of 414 A.D. and 2160 B.C. for the top and bottom of our
column of sediments (Table A), we can suppose that 21 *4 feet of sediment ac-
cumulated in 2, 574 years before the eruption of the Pedrigal, at an average rate of
a foot in 119 years. The variations in the rate may mean simply that the sediments
were much disturbed in ancient times, or they may reflect changes in the rate of
accumulation related to periods of volcanic eruption , when the rate would have
been rapid, and to periods following eruptions when there was no human occupa-
tion and very little vegetation, when it would be very slow. The samples were all
taken from a human occupation site, that is, from mounds under the Pedrigal
containing the ruins of buildings, where the rate of accumulation of sediment
would naturally have been faster. The essential point is that while the radiocarbon
samples taken near the pyramid give us approximate dates for various phases of
the Archaic or Pre-Classical cultures in the area , they have not, so far, dated the
pyramid . No excavation appears to have been made below the pavement men -
tioned by Cummings as surrounding the pyramid . It appears from the evidence
that the structures near the pyramid under the Pedrigal, that have now been
dated , were probably the work of people who occupied the region after the aban-
donment of the pyramid .
204    Maps of the Ancient Sea Kings
      If this is the case, we have the date of 2160 B .C. as a minimum date for the
abandonment of the pyramid . This does not date its construction . Cummings
gives reasons to believe (see Note 19) that the structure was in use for a long
period of time. Since its scale and advanced construction imply an advanced
people possibly flourishing in Mexico four or five thousand years ago, we may
have here a relic of the people who navigated the whole earth , and possessed
the advanced sciences necessary to make our ancient maps.
      A word of caution. I am not expecting that these remarks regarding the
Pyramid of Cuicuilco will be regarded as final in a scientific sense. I mean to sug-
gest only a possibility. I would suggest that there should now be a re-examination
of that pyramid, and of several other sites in Mexico and in South America , to
determine whether, in fact, they may not be related to the ancient civilization
which the maps so strongly indicate must once have existed , and which must have
been worldwide, at least so far as exploration and mapmaking were concerned.
Repeatedly, during the last hundred years, discoveries have been made, which were
claimed by the discoverers to indicate the existence of an ancient advanced civiliza -
tion . These alleged discoveries were disregarded or discredited by archaeologists as
the products of sheer imagination or fakery. The task of disinterring and re-
examining these old and perhaps mistakenly rejected discoveries will be a long one;
that of finding new evidence in the field has not yet been begun . The research
project is one for many hands, many years, and much money.
      Outside the archaeological field there are two areas in which there is worth -
while evidence of an ancient world civilization. There is, first, the problem of the
origin of the principal families of speech and the various groups of languages.
Some scholars have claimed that most languages betray evidences of an original
common language, ancestral to all the groups of language (such as the Indo-
European , etc.). One of these was Arnold D. Wadler, who spent a lifetime on the
problem . I do not know whether his conclusions are valid , but his book ( 214)
shows, it seems to me, a scientific approach . It is interesting that a tradition of a
universal language seems to be common in ancient literature. In Genesis we read ,
of course, “ And the whole earth was of one language and one speech .” Lincoln
Barnett, in his Treasure of Our Tongue , remarks, “The notion that at one time
all men spoke a single language is by no means unique to Genesis. It found ex-
pression in ancient Egypt, in early Hindu and Buddhist writings and was seriously
explored by several European philosophers during the 16th Century. . . .” ( 24:46)
      The other line of research is comparative mythology. For some years, with my
anthropology classes, I have been pursuing research in mythology, and one concept
that has emerged from our studies, and with great clarity I may say, is the virtual
identity of the great systems of mythology throughout the world . The same pat-
                                                     —
tern, the same principal deities, appear everywhere in Europe, in Asia , in North
and South America , in Oceania . Table C below lists the Gods of the Four Elements
—                         —
   Air, Earth , Fire, Water as they are found in mythologies all over the world .
                                          A CIVILIZATION THAT VANISHED 205
      There have been many theories of mythology . One of them attributed the
similarities in the myths to a common origin in Egypt . This has been generally
rejected , because the diffusion of Egyptian myths to America , India , China , and
Oceania cannot be proved . If there was diffusion , the point of origin must lie
farther back , in a culture earlier than Egypt . Another theory attributes the simi-
larities to instinct . Its proponents argue that the myths derive from instincts that
are the same in all men . This theory is weak because, in the first place, modern
psychologists tend to doubt the existence of such instincts , and , secondly, insofar
                                          Table C

                    Gods of the Four Elements in Various Pantheons *

                            FIRE               AIR               EARTH        WATER

    EGYPT            Re                Shu                Geb, Gea            Nu, Nunut

    BABYLONIA        Girru              Anu                Enlil              Ea

    HEBREW           Gabriel            Raphael            Raashiel           Rediyas

    PHOENICIA        Ouranos            Aura               Gea                Ashera

                                        Ahura Mazda                           Anahita
    PERSIA

    INDIA
                *    Afar

                     Agni               Yayu
                                                           Ameretet

                                                           Prithivi           Varuna

    CHINA            Mu-King            How-Chu            Yen-Lo-Wang        Mo-Hi-Hai

     JAPAN           Ama -Terashu       Amida              Ohonamochi         Susa -No O

    IRAN             Asha; Afar         Vohu Manah         Spenta Armati      Hauvatet
            *             Oeshma        Oka Manah          Bushyasta          Apaosha

    NORSE            Thor               Tyr                Odin               Njord

    INCA             Manco-Capac        Supay              Pachacamac         Viracocha

     AZTEC           Ometecutli         Tezcatlipoca       Omeciuatl          Tlaloc

    MAYAN            Kulkulcan          Bacabs             Voltan             Itzamna

     SLAV            Swa                Byelun             Raj                Peroun

     FINNS           Fire-Girl          Ukko               llmatar            Kul Uasa


     * Prepared by the anthropology class at Keene State College.
     t The gods of the four elements in Egypt were different in different periods.
       Persian and Iranian mythologies were not the same; in Iranian mythology the four gods of
    *
the elements have their opposites, representing the good and evil aspects.
206    Maps of the Ancient Sea Kings
as they may exist they can apply only to the most general themes, such as love,
hate, mystical feeling, etc. The resemblances between the myths, as the table
shows, are really too specific to be attributed to general instincts.
      We have, then , a general conclusion . The evidence for an ancient worldwide
civilization , or a civilization that for a considerable time must have dominated
                                                               —
much of the world in a very remote period , is rather plentiful at least potentially.
We have manifold leads, which further research can hardly fail to develop.
Acknowledgments

     I have always felt that science is a social process. As a student of the history
of science I have learned that every advance of science is the product of many
minds working together, even if it may seem that only one individual is respon-
sible. For this reason I wish to give credit here to the many people who have
contributed to this work .
     For the initiation of the project I am deeply indebted to Mrs. Ruth Verrill
of Chiefland, Florida, who first drew my attention to the work of Captain Arling-
ton H . Mallery.
      From the beginning, my students took an active part in the investigation and
many of them made important contributions. Among them were Ernest Adams,
Ronald Bailey, Ruth Baraw, George Batchelder, Richard Cotter, Don Dougal,
Clayton Dow, James D. Enderson , Leo Estes, Sidney B . Gove, William Greer,
Gary Howard , Alfred Isroe, Warren Lee, Marcia Leslie, Loren Livengood, John
F. Malsbenden , John Poor, Frank Ryan, Alan Schuerger , Robert Simenson , Lee
Spencer , Margaret Waugh , Robert Jan Woitkowski, and my sons, Frederick and
William . Many of them were mentioned in the book .
      From the third year of the investigation we were fortunate to receive the
co-operation of Captain Lorenzo W. Burroughs, chief of the Cartographic Unit
of the 8th Reconnaissance Technical Squadron, at Westover Air Force Base,
Westover, Massachusetts. Captain Burroughs and his commanding officer, Colonel
Harold Z. Ohlmeyer, examined our findings regarding the Piri Re’is and Oronteus
 Finaeus Maps, and endorsed them in letters. Captain Burroughs, however, did
 much more than check our conclusions. His many suggestions were invaluable
 to us. In addition, he encouraged the members of his cartographic staff to
contribute their own time to assisting us. The officers and men of the Air Force
 who contributed their work were: Captain Richard E. Covault, Captain B. Farmer,
Chief Warrant Officer Howard D. Minor , Master Sergeant Clifton M . Dover,
 Master Sergeant David C. Carter, Technical Sergeant James H. Hood , Staff
Sergeant James L. Carroll, Airman First Class Don R. Vance, and Airman Second
Class R. Lefever.
      Numerous individuals throughout the country took an interest in our work
and contributed valuable information and advice. These include William Briese-
 meister, chief cartographer of the American Geographical Society, now retired,
 who read the manuscript of this book and contributed suggestions for the prepara -
208 Maps of the Ancient Sea Kings
tion of the various maps in it; David C. Ericson of the Lamont Geological Ob-
servatory, the late Archibald T. Robertson of Boston , Robert L. Merritt, of Cleve-
land , Ohio, who read the manuscript and contributed much scholarly information;
Miss Elizabeth Kendall, of Washington , D.C., who very kindly provided me with
translations of articles from the Soviet press relating to Piri Re’is; and to my aunt ,
Mrs. Norman Hapgood , for many suggestions. I am indebted also to Niels West,
Dino Fabris, Mrs. Margaret Allen , Paul R . Swann ; to Dr . Arch Gerlach , Walter
Ristow, and Richard W. Stephenson , of the Library of Congress; to Miss Nordis
Felland, librarian of the American Geographical Society, to E . Pognon and
M . Herv£ of the Biblioth £que Nationale in Paris; to I . Hatsukade of the National
Diet Library in Tokyo, and to the staff of the Hispanic Society of America, in New
York . In addition , I am grateful for the co-operation extended to me, in my search
for ancient maps of the East, by the former Sultan of Zanzibar and by Emperor
Haile Selassie of Ethiopia .
      I am indebted to the United States Department of State for copies of the
letters relating to the discovery of the Piri Re’is Map. Also, I wish to thank the
American Geographical Society for making arrangements for me with the American
Embassy in Ankara, Turkey, for special photographs of the Piri Re’is Map.
      I must not forget a deep personal debt to Mr . and Mrs. Philip Martin of
Keene, New Hampshire, my most excellent photographers, who bore with me
through the innumerable rephotographings of countless maps, for which I was
always in a hurry, and to my typist, Miss Eileen Sullivan, who worked under
equally bad conditions without ever losing her patience.
      I am most deeply indebted to Dr. J . K. Wright , former director of the Ameri-
can Geographical Society, who, in addition to writing the Foreword to this book ,
read the entire manuscript and contributed many very valuable suggestions for
improvements in both content and style, and to Charles W. Halgren , of Caru
Studios in New York, who, in addition to preparing our drawings for reproduction ,
gave us much valuable advice on technical matters.
Notes

    Note 1: A Biography of Piri Re’is 1
      Piri Muhyi ’l-Din Re’is, Ottoman navigator and cartographer, was probably
of Christian (Greek ) origin and is described as nephew of the famous corsair
Kemal Re’is (on the latter see the Bonn dissertation by Hans- Albrecht von Burski ,
Kemal Re’ is, ein Beitrag zur Geschichte der tiirkischen Flotte , Bonn 1928 and
especially J . H . Mordtmann , Zur Lebensgeschichte des Kemal Re’ is , in M .S.O.S.,
xxxii., part 2, Berlin 1929, p. 39-49 and p. 231 sq .), who was probably a renegade.
His father is said to have been a certain Hadjcjji Mehmed , while he himself in the
preface to his sailing-book calls himself the son of Hadjdjl Hakiri, which is perhaps
only to be taken as a name chosen to rhyme with Pin (cf . Sinan b. ‘Abd al-Mannan
or Dawud b. ‘Abd al-Wudud and similar rhyming names of fathers of renegades
usually formed with ‘Abd ). As Hakiri cannot be an ‘alam but at most a makhlas ,
the pure Turkish descent of Pin is more than doubtful, if he is not called simply
Hakiri Mehmed, i.e. bore a name for which there is evidence, for a later period
it is true, in the Sidjilli-i ‘ othmdni , ii. 239. The same source ( ii. 44) says that the
corsair’s full name was Piri Muhyi ’1- Din Re'is . In any case it may safely be assumed
that Piri is to be taken as a takhallus , while the real name (‘ alam ) was probably

    — —
Mehmed the combination Piri Mehmed was quite customary in the xvith cen -
tury i .e. an ‘alam to which Mujiyi ’1- Din corresponded as khitab (cf . Isl ., xi .,
1921, p. 20, note 3). Of the life of Piri Re’is, who made many voyages under his
uncle Kemal Re’is (d . 16 th Shawwal 916 = Jan . 16, 1511) and later distinguished
himself under Khair al-Din Barbarossa (q .v.; July 4, 1546) we only know that on
these raids he had acquired an unrivalled knowledge of the lands of the Mediter-
ranean . He afterwards held the office of kapudan of Egypt and in this capacity
sailed from Suez on voyages to the Persian Gulf and the Arabian Sea . In 945
(1547) he occupied ‘Aden (cf . Die osmanische Chronik des Rustem Pascha , ed . by
Ludwig Forrer [ Turk . Bibl., xxi ., Leipzig 1923], p. 174 sqq . with full commentary ).
In 959 (1551 ) he lost on the coast of Arabia several of his 30 ships, took the port
of Maskat and carried off a number of its inhabitants as slaves. He then laid siege
to Hormuz but raised the siege and returned to Basra , having accepted bribes to
do so, it is said (according to Pe6ewl, ‘Ali, Hadjdji Khalifa , Tuhfat al - Kibar , first
edition , fol . 28 according to J . v. Hammer, G .O.R ., iii. 415). A report that an
enemy fleet was approaching decided him to return hurriedly home with only 3
galleys but with all the treasure he had collected . He was wrecked on the island
of Bahrain , but succeeded with two ships in reaching Suez, then Cairo. Kobad

     1
         From Encyclopedia of Islam.
210    Maps of the Ancient Sea Kings
Pa ha , the governor of Basra , had in the meanwhile reported to the Porte that
  ^
the expedition had been a failure, which resulted in an order for the execution of
Pin Re’is being sent to Cairo. He was beheaded there, in 962 (1554-1555), it is
said , but probably rather in 959 or 960 and his estate sent to Stambul. After his
death envoys are said to have arrived from Hormuz representing the plundered
inhabitants to demand the return of the treasure he had carried off ; they were
naturally not successful . The post of kapudan of Egypt was given to another noted
corsair, Murad , the dismissed sandjakbey of fCatif ( probably the same as survives
in the proverb, according to H. F. v. Diez, Denkwurdigenkeiten von Asien , part i.,
Berlin 1811, p. 55, as Murad kaptan ) .
       Pir! Re’is is generally known as the author of a sailing-book of the Aegean and
Mediterranean known as Bahriye in which he describes all the coasts he had
voyaged along with an account of the currents, shallows, landing- places, bays,
straits and harbours. Pirl Re’is had already begun the work in the reign of Selim I
( d . Sept. 1520) although he says in the preface that he did not begin it until 927
(end of 1520), in order to make the dedication to Sulaiman the Magnificent be
more impressive. He presented the completed atlas to the latter in 930 (1523).
Paul Kahle has published an edition with text and translation based on the known
manuscripts, entitled Pin Re’ is , Bahriye. Das tiirkische Segelhandbuch fiir das
Mittellandische Meer vom Fahre 1521 of which so far ( middle of 1935) vol . i.,
                                              —
text, part I and vol. ii., part L, section 1 28 have been published , Leipzig and
Berlin 1926. Separate sections had been previously published, e.g. H . F. v. Diez,
op. cit.; E. Sachau, Sizilien , in Centenario delle Nascita di Michele Amari , ii.,
Palermo 1910, p. I sqq .; R. Herzog, Ein tiirkisches Werk iiber das Agdsische Meer
aus dem Fahr 1520 , in Mitteilungen des Kaiserl . Deutschen Archdlog. Instituts,
Athenische Abteilung , xxvii., 1902, p. 417 sqq .; E. Oberhummer, section Zypern ,
in : Die Insel Zypern , Munich 1903, pp. 427-434. Other sections in Carlier de Pinon ,
ed . E. Blochet ( with pictures) and K. Foy, in M .S.O.S., part ii., xi., 1908, p. 234 sqq.
Cf . thereon F. Taeschner in Z.D.M.G., lxxvii . (1923), p. 42 with other references.
       The so-called “Columbus map,’’ found in October 1929 by Khalil Edhem
Bey in the Seray Library in Stambul, according to his signature on it of the year
1513, seems also to go back to Pin Re’is; it is in Turkish in bright colours on parch -
ment, 85 by 60 cm., and represents the western part of a map of the world . It com -
prises the Atlantic Ocean with America and the Western strip of the Old World.
The other parts of the world are lost. It has been supposed that this is the same
map as Pin, according to a statement in his Bahriye , presented to Sultan Selim
in 1517 which would explain its preservation in the Imperial Library. On it cf .
Paul Kahle, Impronte Colombiane in una Carta Turea del 1513 , in La Cultura ,
year x., vol. I, part 10, Milan- Rome 1931; do., Una mapa de America hecho por el
turco Piri Re’ is, en el ano 1513 , basandose en una mapa de Celon y en mapas
portugueses, in Investigation y Progreso , v., 12, Madrid 1931, p. 169 sqq.; “C” in
The Illustrated London News, clxxx., No. 4845 on Febr. 27, 1932, p. 307: A Co-
                      —
lumbus Controversy and two Atlantic charts ( with reproduction); P. Kahle, Die
verschollene Columbus- Karte von 1498 in einer tilrkischen Weltkarte von 1513
( with 9 maps, 52 pp., Berlin and Leipzig 1933); also Eugen Oberhummer , Eine
tiirkische Karte zur Entdeckung Amerikas , in Anzeiger der Akademie der Wissen-
schaften in Wien , phil.-hist. Kl., 1931, pp. 99-112; do., Eine Karte des Columbus
in tiirkischer Vberliejerung, in Mitteilungen der Geographischen Ges. in Wien,
lxxvii., 1934, p. 115 sqq . and lastly P. Kahle in Geographical Review, 1933, pp.
621-638.
                                                                              NOTES 211
      Bibliography: Hadjdji Khalifa , Dfihdnnumd , Stambul 1145, p. 11; do., Tuhfat
al- Kibar fi Esfar al - Bihar , Stambul 1142, p. 28a ; do., Kashf al - Zunun, ed . G. Fliigel,
ii. 22 sqq. ( No. 1689); Mehmed Thureiya, Sidjilli-i ‘ othmani , ii. 44: Kahle, op. cit.,
Introduction : Hans v. Mzik, Pin Re’ is und seine Bahrije , in Beitrage zur historische
Geographie etc., ed. by Hans v. Mzik, Leipzig and Vienna 1929, pp. 60-76.

                                                                         ( FRANZ BABINGER )


        Note 2 : State Department
                 Correspondence
No. 102.                                                          ISTANBUL, July 26, 1932


SUBJECT : Photograph of         Map for Library of Congress.


The Honorable
   THE SECRETARY        OF   STATE,
     Washington

SIR :

     Today there arrived the Department’s unsigned instruction, No. 13 of July 15,
file No. 103.7/ 2409. Also today there came to lunch , Yusuf Akcora Bey, who is not
only a Deputy of the Grand National Assembly, but also President of the new
Turkish Historical Society and presiding officer at their recent congress held in
Ankara . After lunch he produced a copy of the July 23rd LONDON ILLUSTRATED
NEWS and took great pride in turning to pages 142-143 containing the first transla -
tion into English of any of his writings . It was an account of the very map, now
in the possession of the Turkish Government, of which your No. 13 requested a
photograph! He told me that although the map was supposed to be in the Palace
Library at Istanbul, it was really for the present in his possession in Ankara , and
that he would gladly provide me with a photograph thereof the next time he went
up there, which will be in the course of the next week or two. He was as much
surprised as I at the amazing coincidence of my having received a request from
you for this map, a few hours before his showing me the copy of the ILLUSTRATED
NEWS containing the photograph now in his possession . I suggest this information
be communicated to the Library of Congress, so that by consulting that copy of
the English magazine they will be able to see a reproduction of the map and read
an article about it while waiting for the photograph which will shortly follow.
It purports to be a map by a Turkish Admiral prepared upon information received
from Christopher Columbus.
                                                           Respectfully yours,

                                                                 CHARLES H. SHERRILL
103.7
CHS : FM
212 Maps of the Ancient Sea Kings
No. Ill                                                    ISTANBUL, August 4, 1932


SUBJECT :     Photograph of Map for Library of Congress .


The Honorable
    THE SECRETARY     OF   STATE,
      Washington

SIR :
      Referring to your instruction No. 13, File No. 103.7/ 2409, of July 15, you will
please find enclosed two copies of reproductions of a portion of the map referred
to in this instruction . In my No. 102 of July 26, I reported that the map is now in
the personal possession of Yusuf Akcora Bey, President of the History Congress,
and is actually in his house at Ankara, and that he promised me reproductions
thereof . Upon receipt of the two enclosed copies I discovered that they reproduce
only a portion of the map, for use with his article of July 23 in the LONDON ILLUS-
TRATED NEWS . I have written asking him to permit me to have a photograph made
(as per your No. 13), but this request, although he will surely grant it, will be
delayed for several weeks as he will not return to Ankara before the end of Sep-
tember or beginning of October. I had tea with him July 29 at his country place
at Cooz- tepe out beyond Scutari and had quite a talk with him upon the interest
aroused about the Occident by the discovery of this map, and congratulated him
on the timeliness of his article in the London magazine. This morning had another
talk with him there by telephone. He was working last night with the Gazi till
4 A .M . at the Dolma Bagtche Palace upon the new Turkish History, in which this
map is to figure, but promises I shall have fuller photographs when he next visits
Ankara.

                                                           Respectfully yours,

                                                            CHARLES H . SHERRILL

Enclosures:
1, 2,: Two copies of reproductions of portion of map.
103.7/ 2409
CHS:on
                                                                     NOTES 213
                                                       ISTANBUL, August 12, 1932


SUBJECT : Photographs of     Map for Library of Congress .


The Honorable
    THE SECRETARY    OF   STATE,
      Washington

SIR :
      Referring to the Department’s instructions No. 13, File No. 103.7/ 2409 of
July 15, 1932, and to my No. 102 of July 26, I beg further to report that yesterday
there came to luncheon with me at the Embassy, Yusuf Akcora Bey, Deputy and
President of the Historical Congress held during the first fortnight in July at
Ankara . He tells me that the 1513 map of the Turkish Admiral has now been
returned to the Library of the old Seraglio at Seraglio Point in Stamboul, and he
promises to secure me permission to inspect it. He corrected the impression which
I previously held that two copies of the map which I sent with my No. 102 repre-
sented only a portion of a larger map. This is not true, for it is the copy of the
entire map desired by the Library of Congress. He brought with him and pre-
sented me with seven more photographs explaining them to me as follows:
      “A” shows two pages of the book in which the Turkish Admiral describes how
he made these maps as the result of what he personally saw on his own voyages
and having completed the maps and the book, presented them to Sultan Selim I
in Egypt , who was then carrying out the invasion of that country.
      “ B” shows the Straits of Gibraltar with portions of the Spanish and African
coasts. The small town depicted amid the four hills at the top of the photograph
is labelled Granada . Note the larger of the two inscriptions which follow the N.E .
compass line. He there places the title “Spain or Rumeli” which is probably a
reference to the fact that the Turks call the European , as contradistinguished from
the Asiatic shore of the Bosphorus, “ Rumeli.”
      “C” shows the French Riviera shore from Nice running easterly toward Italy.
      “ D” shows the Italian shore from Pisa ( up in the left hand corner ) down
through to Civitavecchia and the mouth of the Tiber.
      “E ” shows the Island of Rhodes.
      “ F” gives a group of islands, but my Turkish friend did not seem to be able
to locate them.
      “G ” is another map from the book, but as it bears no Turkish titles discloses
nothing of its whereabouts.
      Yusuf Akcora Bey was insistent upon calling my attention to the fact that all
the writing on these maps is in Turkish and not Arabic, although written in Arabic
script. This is equally true of the writing upon the larger map sent you in my
No. 102. He translated to me the long inscription which states that this map was
not the result of the Turkish Admiral’s own investigations, but is copied from
Christopher Columbus’ map, which unfortunately is now lost. It carried the name
of Columbus no less than eight times, and is chiefly interesting for the contem -
porary statement that Columbus was of Genoese birth, and not of Spanish as
214 Maps of the Ancient Sea Kings
certain Spanish writers have recently claimed . It tells that Columbus, the Genoese,
incited thereto by an ancient book , applied to the Genoese authorities for ships
and money to enable him to cross the seas to Japan and China . This recalls the
fact ( not generally known ) that up to the day of his death, Columbus thought the
western islands which he discovered were part of Zipango or Japan . When the
Genoese authorities refused him , he next applied to the “ Bey of Spain ,” who finally
gave him two ships. With these he sailed westerly across the great sea and finally
reached land. There came down to meet him the entirely naked inhabitants who
shot at the invaders with arrows pointed with fish bones. Columbus finally pacified
them to the extent of trading beads for fish . Presently he remarked a golden
bracelet on a woman’s arm , and this led to his trading beads for gold , which came
from mines up in the hills. Later he found that the natives also had real pearls,
and he then traded beads for pearls. He returned to deliver his booty to the “ Bey
of Spain ,” who sent him back on a second voyage, of which we learn little except
that he carried with him onions and barley, which were soon cultivated by the
natives. I hope to get further information about this map later on , and will
promptly forward the same.
                                                             Respectfully yours,

                                                             CHARLES H. SHERRILL
Enclosures:
Nos. 1-7 Photographic copies of 1513 maps of a Turkish Admiral .

103.7
CHS:on

No. 272                                                 ANKARA, December 23, 1932


SUBJECT : Photograph of      Map for Library of Congress .


The Honorable
    THE SECRETARY OF STATE,
       Washington

SIR :
     Referring to your No. 58 of November 29, I beg to report that immediately
upon its receipt, December 13, I wrote to Yusuf Akcura [sic] Bey ( President of last
July’s Historical Congress) asking for the information requested by you for the
Library of Congress. I have had two long talks with him yesterday and today upon
the subject of your No. 58, and he tells me that, upon receiving my letter, he
instituted systematic and widespread inquiry to ascertain “whether there is any
chance whatever that the original Spanish or Italian chart of Columbus is still
preserved in the Turkish archives or among the papers of the family of Piri Reis.”
Piri Reis was finally beheaded , so it is more than doubtful if anything will be found ,
                                                                      NOTES 215
because beheading was generally followed by complete confiscation of the deceased’s
effects.
      There is enclosed herewith a copy of his letter mentioned in the LONDON
ILLUSTRATED NEWS, volume 181, 1932, pages 142 and 143, which you requested .
      In regard to the “literal transliterations and translations of the place names
and other legends in the western half of the map,” please see my letter to Mr.
J . Brent Clarke, Chief of the Department’s Mail Room, dated December 19, which
explains the possible sending on of the map and translations to me after my
departure from Washington to my house in New York. On December 19, I also
wrote my house to send any such mailing tube back to Mr. Wallace Murray with
a line saying that it was being returned in compliance with the Department’s
instruction , No. 58 of November 29, 1932. In regard to these translations by Ali Nur
Bey, he has consulted a number of Turks versed in maritime matters, but even
those specialists were, in some instances, puzzled by the nautical words used by
that distinguished Turkish navigator back in 1513. Although the language used is
Turkish , the characters are Arabic, and this means that there is frequent omission
of vowels from the words written on the map, which of course complicates the
transliteration into English or Spanish or Italian of the geographical place names.
Notwithstanding this difficulty, I think that Ali Nur Bey has been surprisingly
successful in his efforts.
                                                          Respectfully yours,

                                                           CHARLES H. SHERRILL
Enclosure:
1. Copy of letter.

103/7/892.3
CHS :er

                     Enclosure No. [1 ] to Despatch No. 272
              of December [23, 1932] from the Embassy at Istanbul .

COPY:
TURK TARIHI TETKIK CEMIYETI
       Reisligi


To the EDITOR of the “ Illustrated London News,”
                                 London, England

DEAR SIR ,
    We had the pleasure of reading the explanation given in the issue of your
valuable magazine dated February 25, 1932 regarding the map drawn by Piri Reis,
one of the Turkish geographers.
    We kindly request the publication in your magazine [of ] the following lines
216       Maps of the Ancient Sea Kings
containing the results of the studies we have made on the original of this map now
in our possession , and aiming to complete your exposes as well as to correct certain
mistakes in it.
     We enclose, as documents to prove our statement , photographic copies of two
pages from the book “ Bahriye” of Piri Reis, and five small maps taken from the
same book .
      We shall be glad to see them , with this explanatory article, published in your
worthy magazine.
     The map in question is drawn on a gazelle skin by Piri Reis who had made a
name for himself among the Western and Eastern Scholars1 through his detailed geo-
graphical book on the Mediterranean Sea entitled “On the Sea ” and which testifies
to his capacity and knowledge in his profession . Piri Reis is the son of the brother
of the famous Kemal Reis who was the Turkish admiral in the Mediterranean Sea
at the last quarter of the fifteenth century. History records Piri Reis Bey’s last
official post as admiral of the Fleets in the Red Sea and the Indian Ocean . Piri Reis
wrote and completed the above- mentioned map in the city of Gelibolu (Gallipoli )
in the year 1513, and four years after this date, i .e. in the year 1517, he presented
personally to Selim I , the conqueror of Egypt, during the presence of the latter
there.2
     As the same thing will be noticed in the maps of ancient and mediaeval times,
the map of Piri Reis contain [sic] important marginal notes regarding the history
and the geographical conditions of some of the coasts and islands.3 All these
marginal notes with hundreds of lines of explanation were written in Turkish . Three
lines only, which from the title and head lines of the map, were written in Arabic;
and this is done to comply with the usual traditional way which is noticed on all
the Ottoman Turkish monuments up [ to] the very latest centuries. These three
lines in Arabic testify that the author is the nephew of Kemal Reis, and that the
work [ was ] written and compiled of [sic] Gelibolu in the year 1513.


      1
       There are 207 fine charts drawn by Piri Reis in this book of his wherein cor-
rect and scientific informations [sic] profusely presented. (See enclosed copies of
the maps of Malta , Sicily, Corsica, environs of Gibraltar, Venice.) This book
“ Bahriye” ( = On the Sea ) was prepared by Piri Reis, at GHibolu, as a tentative
work eight years after the above-mentioned map was made, and seven years later,
improved and rewritten by the author it was presented to Kanum Suleyman (Soli-
man the Magnificent ) in Istanbul. Several copies of this work are found in the
libraries of Stanbul ( in the Museum of Topkapi, in the Naval Museum and in
the libraries of Aya-Sofya (St. Sofia ) and Nun Osmaniye as well as in the Dresden
Library, in the University Library at Bologne and in the Biblioth que Nationale
                                                                      ^
in Paris. Kahle, a Bonne University professor, in addition to the articles he had
published on this book, has taken the initiative in recent years in reproducing it.
     2
       In the introduction of his book Piri Reis gives some explanations about maps,
at the  same time, he has the following lines concerning his own map: “ Previously
I prepared a more detailed map and presented it to Selim (Sultan Selim ) in Egypt
and he congratulated me. In tnis map I recorded the latest information about tne
Indian and Chinese seas which was set forth on the maps prepared at that time;
but which was not known here.” ( The photographic reproduction of     c the original
of this statement is enclosed under No. 7.)
     3
       See marginal notes on the west edge of the map.
                                                                        NOTES 217
     The map in our possession is a fragment and it was out of from [sic] a world
chart on large scale. When the photographic copy of the map is careful y examined,
it will be noticed that the lines of the marginal noted [sic] on the eastern edges
have been cut half away.4
     In one of these marginal notes the author states in detail the maps he had seen
and studied in preparing his map. In the marginal note describing the Antilles
Islands, he states that he has used Christopher Columbus’ chart for the coasts and
islands. He sets forth the narratives of the voyages made, by a Spaniard a slave
in the hands of Kemal Reis, Piri Reis’ uncle, who under Christopher Columbus
made three voyages to America . He also states, in his marginal notes regarding the
South American coast that he saw the charts of four Portuguese discoverers. That
he has made use of Christopher Columbus’ chart is made clear in the following
lines of his:
     In order that these islands and their coasts might be known Columbus gave them
these names and set it down on his chart. The coasts ( the names of the coasts) and the
islands are taken from the chart of Columbus.

      The work essentially was a world map. Therefore Piri Reis had made a study
of some of the charts which represented the world , and according to his personal
statement, he has studied and examined the maps prepared at the time of Alexander
( the Great ), the “ Mappa Mundis” and the eight maps in fragments prepared by
the Muslims.6
      Piri Reis himself plainly explains, in one of the marginal notes in his map, how
his map was prepared : —
     This section explains the way the map was prepared . Such a map is not owned by
any body at this time. I, personally, drawn [sic] and prepared this map. In preparing
this map, I made use of about twenty old charts and eight Mappa Mundis, i.e. of the
charts called “ Jaferiye” by the Arabs and prepared at the time of Alexander the Great
and in which the whole inhabited world was shown ; of the chart of [ the] West Indies;
and of the new maps made by four Portugueses [sic] containing the Indian and Chinese
countries geometrically represented on them . I also studied the chart that Christopher
Columbus drew for the West. Putting all these material [sic] together in a common
scale I produced the present map. My map is as correct and dependable for the seven
seas as are the charts that represent the seas of our countries.

     Piri Reis, in a special chapter in his book “ Bahriye” mentions the fact that in
drawing his map he has taken note of the cartographical traditions considered
international at that time. The cities and citadels are indicated in red lines, the
deserted places in black lines, the rugged and rocky places in black dots, the shores
and sandy places in red dots and the hidden rocks by crosses. In short :


     4
       See marginal note on the South-East corner of the map.
     5
       It has been rightly said bv the latest Oriental Scholars that it is a mistake to
talk of an Arabic Civilization. They should talk of an Islamic Civilization. Because
those who have created this civilization , were not all Arabs, although they used the
Arabic language there were among them more Persians and Turks than Arabs.
218 Maps of the Ancient Sea Kings
      1 . The picture of the map printed in your magazine is the Turkish work of a
Turkish sailor of the name Piri Reis. The work is not in Arabic. Except the three
lines as an introduction to the map, the rest are written entirely in Turkish . Even
the places on the Atlantic coast of Africa bear the Turkish geographical names
like Babadagi ( = Father Mount ), Akburun ( = White Cap), Yesilburun ( = Green
Cap), Kizilburun ( = Red Cap), Kozluburun ( = Walnut Cap), Altin Irmak
( = Gold River ) and Giizel Korfez ( = Handsome Gulf ).®
      2. The map was finished and presented to the Padishah in 919 . . . (1513),
and certainly not in 929 ( 1523).7
      3. Piri Reis states that in preparing this work he has made use of the charts
prepared in the Islamic World, the Portuguese charts and even the chart of
Christopher Columbus. But this is not a copy; it is an original work.
      4. The map in our possession is a fragment . If the other fragment were not
lost, there would have been in our possession a Turkish chart drawn in 1513 repre-
senting the old and new worlds together. As Christopher Columbus’ voyages took
place in the latter part of the fifteenth century, it can be said that such a map
which was made a little after the new discoveries, is one of the early charts to have
contained in it all the continents of the world .
                                                              Sincerely yours,

                                                          (»)

                                                                Department of State
                                                                WASHINGTON
In reply refer to                                               March 20, 1933
HA 103.7/ 2537
LIBRARIAN OF CONGRESS,
      Washington, D.C.
SIR :
     The Department refers to previous correspondence regarding a map which is
said to have been prepared by a Turkish Admiral upon information received from
Columbus, and encloses a copy of a further despatch on the subject, No. 374 of
February 21, 1933, from the American Ambassador at Istanbul.
                                                    Very truly yours,
                                                For the Secretary of State:
                                                E. WILDER SPAULDING ,
Enclosure:                                      Assistant to the Historical Adviser
  From Embassy, Istanbul,
  No. 374, February 21, 1933.
     6
       See West coast of Africa at the chart.
     7
       The date is clearly read on the title lines of the chart: “Tis’a ashara va tis’a
mi’a ” ( = nine hundred and nineteen ).
     * Source of the preceding letters is The National Archives, Washington , D.C.
                                                                      NOTES     219

                      Enclosure No. 2 to Despatch No. 374
               of February 21, 1933, from the Embassy at Istanbul


                                 TRANSLATION
                                 PIRI REIS MAP
                                    SOURCE: LETTER FROM YUSUF
                                            AKCURA BEY, Deputy
                                                 of Istanbul at the
                                                 GRAND NATIONAL ASSEM-
                                                 BLY OF TURKEY, dated
                                                 February 19, 1933

AKCURAOCIU YUSUF
Deputy of Istanbul
                                              ANKARA , Kecioren, February 19, 1933


MR . AMBASSADOR :
      Upon receipt of your esteemed favour of December 17, 1932, I immediately
wrote a circular letter to the directors of our various museums and to some friends
who are engaged in the study of questions dealing with the maritime history of
Turkey, requesting them to assist me in my search for the original map of Christo-
pher Columbus and of the descendants of Piri Reis.
      I have received up to the present time nine replies . All of my correspondents
maintain that none of the Turkish museums or archives contain the testament or
will of our famous armiral [ sic ] . The Direction of the Evkaf likewise does not
know of any certificate relating to a pious fund signed by him or by his heirs.
      Piri Reis having been beheaded in Egypt in 1564, it is very likely that he had
no opportunity to convey his property and his precious documents to his heirs.
Besides there is no reliable information as to his having had heirs.
      However, Djevdet Bey, one of our historians, informed me that Commander
Saffet Bey who died in 1912 told him of having found in the archives of the
Ministry of Marine a document mentioning the granting of a pension to the
descendants of Piri Reis by Sultan Selim III (1789-1807).
      On the basis of this information I will continue my investigations. I shall not
fail to communicate to you the results which they may yield.
      Please accept, Mr. Ambassador, the assurance of my sincere and most cordial
regards.

                                                         (signed ) AKCURA YUSUF
General CHARLES H . SHERRILL,
   Ambassadour [sic] of the United States to Turkey
220 Maps of the Ancient Sea Kings


    Note 3: The Legends on the
            Piri Re’is Map''*"
      I . There is a kind of red dye called vakami, that you do not observe at first,
because it is at a distance . . . the mountains contain rich ores. . . . There some
of the sheep have silken wool.
      II. This country is inhabited . The entire population goes naked .
      III. This region is known as the vilayet of Antilia . It is on the side where the
sun sets. They say that there are four kinds of parrots, white, red , green and black .
The people eat the flesh of parrots and their headdress is made entirely of parrots’
feathers. There is a stone here. It resembles black touchstone. The people use it
instead of the ax. That it is very hard . . . [ illegible]. JPe saw that stone.
      [NOTE: Piri Reis writes in the “ Bahriye”: “ In the enemy ships which we
captured in the Mediterranean , we found a headdress made of these parrot feathers,
and also a stone resembling touchstone.”]
      IV. This map was drawn by Piri Ibn Haji Mehmed , known as the nephew
of Kemal Reis, in Gallipoli, in the month of muharrem of the year 919 ( that is,
between the 9th of March and the 7th of April of the year 1513).
      V. This section tells how these shores and also these islands were found .
     These coasts are named the shores of Antilia . They were discovered in the
year 896 of the Arab calendar. But it is reported thus, that a Genoese infidel, his
name was Colombo, he it was who discovered these places. For instance, a book
fell into the hands of the said Colombo, and he found it said in this book that
at the end of the Western Sea [ Atlantic] that is, on its western side, there were
coasts and islands and all kinds of metals and also precious stones. The above-
mentioned, having studied this book thoroughly, explained these matters one by
one to the great of Genoa and said : “Come, give me two ships, let me go and find
these places.” They said : “O unprofitable man , can an end or a limit be found to
the Western Sea ? Its vapour is full of darkness.” The above-mentioned Colombo
saw that no help was forthcoming from the Genoese, he sped forth , went to the
Bey of Spain [king] , and told his tale in detail. They too answered like the Genoese.
In brief Colombo petitioned these people for a long time, finally the Bey of Spain
gave him two ships, saw that they were well equipped , and said :
      “O Colombo, if it happens as you say, let us make you kapudan [admiral ]
to that country.” Having said which he sent the said Colombo to the Western Sea .
The late Gazi Kemal had a Spanish slave. The above-mentioned slave said to
Kemal Reis, he had been three times to that land with Colombo. He said : “ First
we reached the Strait of Gibraltar, then from there straight south and west between
the two . . . [ illegible]. Having advanced straight four thousand miles, we saw
an island facing us, but gradually the waves of the sea became foamless, that is,

        —                                    —
the sea was becalmed and the North Star the seamen on their compasses still
say star little by little was veiled and became invisible, and he also said that the


    * From “The Oldest Map of America,” by Professor Dr. Afet Inan. Ankara ,
1954, pp. 28-34. The Roman numerals refer to ttie key map.
       V   -
uI '
       -




  *               11  ,
           v
               ^X
                  ^              S3CS
                                     LTI




                          -* -   ^W
                                 .
                                     SSS
                                       . *_,




       Figure 100. The Piri Re’is Map, with Roman numerals corresponding to the
                         translated legends. After A. Afet Inan.
222 Maps of the Ancient Sea Kings
stars in that region are not arranged as here. They are seen in a different arrange-
ment. They anchored at the island which they had seen earlier across the way,
the population of the island came, shot arrows at them and did not allow them
to land and ask for information . The males and the females shot hand arrows.
The tips of these arrows were made of fishbones, and the whole population went
naked and also very . . . [ illegible]. Seeing that they could not land on that island;
they crossed to the other side of the island, they saw a boat. On seeing them ; the
boat fled and they [ the people in the boat ] dashed out on land . They [ the Spaniards]
took the boat . They saw that inside of it there was human flesh . It happened that
these people were of that nation which went from island to island hunting men
and eating them . They said Colombo saw yet another island , they neared it, they
saw that on that island there were great snakes. They avoided landing on this
island and remained there seventeen days. The people of this island saw that no
harm came to them from this boat, they caught fish and brought it to them in
their small ship’s boat [ filika ]. These [Spaniards] were pleased and gave them glass
                                                   —
beads. It appears that he [Columbus] had read in the book that in that region
glass beads were valued . Seeing the beads they brought still more fish . These
[Spaniards] always gave them glass beads . One day they saw gold around the arm
of a woman, they took the gold and gave her beads. They said to them , to bring
more gold , we will give you more beads, [ they said ]. They went and brought them
much gold . It appears that in their mountains there were gold mines. One day,
also, they saw pearls in the hands of one person . They saw that when ; they gave
beads, many more pearls were brought to them . Pearls were found on the shore
of this island , in a spot one or two fathoms deep. And also loading their ship with
many logwood trees and taking two natives along, they carried them within that
year to the Bey of Spain . But the said Colombo, not knowing the language of these
people, they traded by signs, and after this trip the Bey of Spain sent priests and
barley, taught the natives how to sow and reap and converted them to his own
religion. They had no religion of any sort . They walked naked and lay there like
animals. Now these regions have been opened to all and have become famous.
The names which mark the places on the said islands and coasts were given by
Colombo, that these places may be known by them . And also Colombo was a
great astronomer. The coasts and island on this map are taken from Colombo’s
map.
      VI. This section shows in what way this map was drawn . In this century
                                                             —
there is no map like this map in anyone’s possession . The hand of this poor man
has drawn it and now it is constructed . From about twenty charts and Mappae
       —
Mundi these are charts drawn in the days of Alexander, Lord of the Two Horns,
which show the inhabited quarter of the world; the Arabs name these charts
       —
Jaferiye from eight Jaferiyes of that kind and one Arabic map of Hind , and from
the maps just drawn by four Portuguese which show the countries of Hind , Sind
and China geometrically drawn , and also from a map drawn by Colombo in the
western region I have extracted it. By reducing all these maps to one scale this final
form was arrived at. So that the present map is as correct and reliable for the
Seven Seas as the map of these our countries is considered correct and reliable by
seamen.
      VII. It is related by the Portuguese infidel that in this spot night and day
are at their shortest of two hours, at their longest of twenty two hours. But the day
 is very warm and in the night there is much dew.
                                                                         NOTES 223
      VIII. On the way to the vilayet of Hind a Portuguese ship encountered a
contrary wind [blowing] from the shore. The wind from the shore . . . [illegible]
it [ the ship]. After being driven by a storm in a southern direction they saw a
shore opposite them they advanced towards it [ illegible]. They saw that these places
are good anchorages. They threw anchor and went to the shore in boats. They saw
people walking, all of them naked . But they shot arrows, their tips made of fish -
bone. They stayed there eight days. They traded with these people by signs. That
barge saw these lands and wrote about them which . . . . The said barge without
going to Hind, returned to Portugal, where, upon arrival it gave information . . . .
They described these shores in detail. . . . They have discovered them .
      IX. And in this country it seems that there are white-haired monsters in this
shape, and also six-horned oxen . The Portuguese infidels have written it in their
maps. . .      .
      X. This country is a waste. Everything is in ruin and it is said that large snakes
are found here. For this reason the Portuguese infidels did not land on these shores
and these are also said to be very hot.
      XI. And these four ships are Portuguese ships. Their shape is written down .
They travelled from the western land to the point of Abyssinia [ Habesh ] in order
to reach India . They said towards Shuluk . The distance across this gulf is 4200
miles.
      XII            on this shore a tower
             . . . . is however
             .       in this climate gold
                     taking a rope
             . . . . is said they measured
       [NOTE : The fact that half of each of these lines is missing is the clearest proof
of the map’s having been tom in two.]
       XIII . And a Genoese kuke [a type of ship] coming from Flanders was caught
in a storm . Impelled by the storm it came upon these islands, and in this manner
these islands became known .
       XIV. It is said that in ancient times a priest by the name of Sanvolrandan
(Santo Brandan ) travelled on the Seven Seas, so they say. The above- mentioned
landed on this fish . They thought it dry land and lit a fire upon this fish, when
the fish’s back began to burn it plunged into the sea, they reembarked in their
boats and fled to the ship. This event is not mentioned by the Portuguese infidels.
It is taken from the ancient Mappae Mundi.
       XV. To these small islands they have given the name of Undizi Vergine. That
is to say the Eleven Virgins.
       XVI . And this island they call the Island of Antilia . There are many monsters
and parrots and much logwood. It is not inhabited .
       XVII . This barge was driven upon these shores by a storm and remained
where it fell. . . . Its name was Nicola di Giuvan . On his map it is written that
these rivers which can be seen have for the most part gold [in their beds ]. When
the water had gone they collected much gold [dust] from the sand . On their
TTlcip * • •
     XVIII. This is the barge from Portugal which encountered a storm and came
to this land . The details are written on the edge of this map. [ NOTE : see VIII .]
     XIX. The Portuguese infidels do not go west of here. All that side belong.         1

entirely to Spain . They have made an agreement that [a line] two thousand mile
224     Maps of the Ancient Sea Kings
to the western side of the Strait of Gibraltar should be taken as a boundary. The
Portuguese do not cross to that side but the Hind side and the southern side belong
to the Portuguese.
     XX . And this caravel having encountered a storm was driven upon this island .
Its name was Nicola Giuvan . And on this island there are many oxen with one
horn. For this reason they call this island Isle de Vacca, which means, Ox Island.
     XXI . The admiral of this caravel is named Messir Anton the Genoese, but
he grew up in Portugal . One day the above-mentioned caravel encountered a storm ,
it was driven upon this island . He found much ginger here and has written about
these islands.
     XXII . This sea is called the Western Sea , but the Frank sailors call it the
Mare d ’Espagna . Which means the Sea of Spain . Up to now it was known by
these names, but Colombo, who opened up this sea and made these islands known ,
and also the Portuguese, infidels who have opened up the region of Hind have
agreed together to give this sea a new name. They have given it the name of
Ovo Sano [Oceano] that is to say, sound egg. Before this it was thought that the
sea had no end or limit, that at its other end was darkness. Now they have seen
that this sea is girded by a coast, because it is like a lake, they have called it
Ovo Sano.
     XXIII . In this spot there are oxen with one horn, and also monsters in this
shape.
     XXIV. These monsters are seven spans long. Between their eyes there is a
distance of one span . But they are harmless souls.




      Note A: Blundeville’s Directions
              for Constructing the
              Portolan Design'!                                -
      “Of   the Mariners Carde and of the marking thereof .”
     “ First drawe with a pair of compasses a secrete circle which may be put out,
so great as you shall think meet for your carde, which circle shall signifie the
Horizon, then divide that circle into foure equall quarters, by drawing two Diam -
eters crossing one another, in the center of the foresaide circle with right angles,
whereof the perpendicular line is the line of North and South, and the other
crossing the same is the line of East and West, at the foure ends of which crosse
Diameters you must set downe the foure principall windes, that is, East, West,
North , and South , making the North parte with a flower deluce in the toppc, and
the East parte with a crosse, as you may see in the figure following . Then divide
everie quarter of the saide circle with your compasses into two equall partes, setting
downe pricks in the middest of everie quarter, through which pricks, and also
through the centre of the circle drawe two other crosse lines, which must extende

     * Heathecote ( 89 ) quotes the directions given by Blundeville in “ Blundeville
his Exercises,” 1594, for constructing the portolano design.
                                                                       NOTES 225
somewhat beyond the circumference of the Horizon, which two crosse lines together
with the first two crosse lines shall divide the circle into 8 partes, and thereby you
shall have the eight principall windes. That done, divide everie eight part of the
saide Horizon into two equall partes by drawing other two crosse lines through the
centre and extending somewhat beyond the circumference of the Horizon as before,
whereby the whole circle shall be divided into 16 partes, which shall suffice without
making anie more divisions, which woulde cause a confusion of lines, and at the
end of every one of these 16 lines you must drawe a little circle, whose center must
stande upon the circumference of the Horizon , everie one whereof must bee also
divided into 16 partes by the helpe of 16 lines, diversely drawne from the center
of one little circle to another, in such order as the figure here placed more plainely
sheweth to the eie, than I can expresse by mouth . And these little circles do signifie
16 little Mariners Compasses, the lines whereof signifying the winds, do shew how
one place beareth from another, and by what winde the shippe hath to saile. But
besides these little circles there is woont to be drawne also another circle somewhat
greater than the rest upon the verie center of the Horizon, which circle by reason
of the 16 lines that were drawne passing through the same, is divided into 16 parts,
and the Mariners doe call this circle the mother compas.”




     Note 5: Strachan on Map
             Projections
     Richard W. Strachan discusses here the features of a number of projec-
tions that appear to have been involved with one or more of the ancient maps.
The reader may be reminded that map projections are mechanical and mathemat-
ical devices for transferring points from the round earth to flat paper, and they
are therefore artificial and complex . The earth is virtually a sphere, and only a
globe can correctly represent all of it in correct proportion . Various projections
may represent parts of the earth on flat paper with sufficient accuracy for practical
purposes, but they all have their faults, and they all distort the earth very badly
in one way or another. The mapmaker tries to select the particular projection that
is best for mapping the area he wants to map, the projection that has the most
advantages and the fewest disadvantages. Strachan here defines five projections,
but there are many more. For more detailed discussions the reader may consult
Deetz and Adams (60).
     AZIMUTHAL : An azimuthal projection is one in which the earth is projected
onto a flat plane held tangent to it at one point . The tangent point may be at a
pole, on the equator, or anywhere else desired . The class of azimuthal projections
includes several of interest , namely the stereographic, gnomonic and azimuthal
equidistant, which are described below.

     STEREOGRAPHIC : A stereographic projection results if the earth is pro-
jected onto a plane from a point on the earth opposite to the point of tangency.
226    Maps of the Ancient Sea Kings
The advantages of this projection are that it can show a whole hemisphere without
great distortion, and that great circles * through the tangent point plot as straight
lines.
     GNOMONIC: A gnomonic projection is obtained when the projection of
the earth onto a tangent plane is done from the center of the earth . The advantage
of this projection is that any great circle plots as a straight line.
     AZIMUTHAL EQUIDISTANT: This projection is one in which the distance
scale along any great circle through a tangent point is constant. A polar azimuthal
equidistant projection shows the meridians of longitude as straight radial lines,
and the parallels as equally spaced concentric circles. It cannot be visualized as
being projected , but rather as being constructed , by setting up a scale and trans-
ferring the features of the earth onto this scale point by point. It has the great
advantage that the whole earth may be shown. Also it has a constant distance
scale from the point of tangency (or “ pole” ); and, like all other azimuthal projec-
tions, all angles measured from the point of tangency are true.
     CORDIFORM : No recent literature describes the cordiform projection , and
to get some sort of definitive statement on it , it was necessary to refer to Norden-
skiold . He lists three cordiform projections ( 147 :86-92 ). The first he ascribes to the
cartographer Sylvanus, noting its similarity to Ptolemy’s “ homeother ” projection .
The second , also similar to Ptolemy’s homeother projection , was used by the
geographer Apianus in a map he drew in 1520. The third was described by Johannes
Werner in 1514 as an invention of his own . The second of these projections was
the one used by Oronteus Finaeus, and later by Mercator. It is often referred to
as “ Werner’s Second Projection ” since he discussed all three. The details of this
projection are as follows :
      (a ) The pole is the center for the parallels of latitude, which are concentric
circles or portions of concentric circles.
      (b) TTie size (diameter, circumference, spacing) of the parallels is adjusted to
give the true proportion between the length of the degree of longitude at the
equator and at other latitudes. That is, the sizes of the parallels are changed to give
the right length of a degree of longitude at any latitude.
      (c) At the equator, the length of the degree of latitude is equal to the length
of the degree of longitude.
     MERCATOR PROJECTION : This projection is of the cylindrical type, in
which a cylinder , placed around the earth and touching it along a circle, has
projected onto it ( from inside outwards ) a representation of the earth’s surface.
The cylinder is then cut lengthwise, and flattened out to form a map. If the
cylinder is tangent to the earth at the equator, the meridians become vertical,
parallel, equidistant, straight lines; and the equator becomes a horizontal straight
line across the center of the map.

     * A “great circle” is a circle about the earth that equals the full circumference.
For example, the eauator is a great circle, but it is the only parallel of latitude which
is a great circle. All other parallels are shorter, and are therefore not great circles.
A great circle actually describes a plane that cuts the earth in half , and may be
drawn about the eartn in any direction. (C.H.)
                                                                         NOTES 227
     The Mercator Projection is of the cylindrical type, but is not constructed by
geometric projection . The parallels of latitude are derived mathematically. Its main
feature is that the parallels of latitude are spaced ever farther apart with increasing
distances from the equator, so as to maintain , at every point, the correct ratio
between the degree of latitude and the degree of longitude; which , of course, actu-
ally grow shorter toward the poles. The advantage of this projection is that it is
             —
“conformal ” that is to say angles may be measured correctly at any point , and
distances may be measured directly over small changes in latitude. For purposes of
navigation, course lines are straight lines, whose directions may be directly measured
from the chart.




    Note 6 : Plane v. Spherical
             Trigonometry in the
             Pini Re’is Map
    Strachan a number of times calculated the positions of the five projection
points on the Piri Re’is Map both by plane and by spherical trigonometry. Each
time it seemed that the calculations by spherical trigonometry were at variance
with the geography of the map. The following comparison will illustrate the point .
It was made in 1960, on the assumptions that the center of the map was at Syene,
on the Tropic of Cancer in Longitude 32 *4 ° East, that the radius of the circle was
drawn from this point to the North Pole, and that the base line for latitude was
the Piri Re’is Equator.

                          Plane                           Spherical
                      Trigonometry                      Trigonometry

                    1 . 50.9 N; 30.5 W             1.   38.1 N; 46.1 W
                    2. 25.7 N; 36.4 W              2.   18.7 N; 42.0 W
                    3. 0.0 N ; 34.4 W              3.    0.0 N; 34.0 W
                    4 . 22.1 S; 18.5 W             4.   18.2 S; 23.1 W
                    5. 37.0 S; 2.6 E               5.   32.9 S; 07.1 W

     We see that by plane trigonometry the maximum spread of latitude is 87.9
degrees, and that of longitude is 39 degrees. By spherical trigonometry, on the
other hand , the spread of latitude is only 71 degrees while the spread of longitude
is 53.2 degrees. Thus the effect of the use of spherical trigonometry would be to
compress latitude and exaggerate longitude in a way that apparently does not fit
the map at all.
228 Maps of the Ancient Sea Kings


    Note ~7 \ Stnachan on the Necessity
              of the Use of Trigonometry
              for Mapping Large Areas

                                             Massachusetts Institute of Technology,
                                             CAMBRIDGE, MASSACHUSETTS,
                                             April 18, 1965


Mr. Charles Hapgood
Keene State College
Keene, N.H .

DEAR CHARLIE,

      In reply to your question as to the possibility of mapping very large areas of
the earth’s surface without the use of mathematics, I must say that I am convinced
that the source map or maps from which your ancient maps are derived must have
had some mathematical foundation , for one or more of the following reasons :
      (1 ) The determination of place locations relative to one another on a continent
requires at least geometric triangulation methods. Over large distances (of the order
of 1 ,000 miles) corrections must be made for the curvature of the earth , which
require some understanding of spherical trigonometry.
      ( 2) The location of continents with respect to one another requires an under -
standing of the earth’s sphericity, and the use of spherical trigonometry.
      ( 3) Cultures with this knowledge, plus the precision instruments to make the
required measurements to determine location would most certainly use their mathe-
matical technology in creating maps and charts. The application of the portolan
grid system to these old maps must surely be after the fact ; it would not be at all
useful in the construction of such maps.
      (4) Your discovery of the apparent use of the mercator type of projection in
the Piri Re’is, De Canerio and Chinese maps came as a very great surprise.* Yet, in
view of the technology required to make maps of such accuracy this discovery
seems less startling, because, for one thing, of the great utility of the mercator type
projection in navigation . This is, of course, more complex than the simple geometric
projection . With this ( which involves latitude expansion with increasing latitude)
a trigonometric coordinate transformation method must be used .
      I hope that this answers your question.
                                                                    Best regards,
                                                                  DICK [STRACHAN ]



     * This was later found to be mistaken (see p. 35)  .
                                                                         NOTES 229



    Note 8: Strachan on the
            Construction of the
            Piri Re’is Grid
                                                               19 AGASSIZ ST., APT . 24
                                                               CAMBRIDGE 40, MASS .
                                                               2 August 1960

Mr. Charles Hapgood
296 Court St.
Keene, New Hampshire

DEAR CHARLIE,
      I just received your letter (of 7- 30-60), and thought that I’d better write and
clear up some misunderstandings on your part. You seem to feel that the grid
which Frank * drew lines up pretty closely with the locations of the points which
I figured out, which is true , but that the grid was figured pretty independently of
the latitudes and longitudes of the points, which is false. The fact is, that the grid
was derived from the latitude and longitude of the points. They are directly related,
and had the Piri Re’is chart [ the parchment on which the map is drawn ] not
stretched or shrunk some, they would coincide. And quite probably, some of the
discrepancies are due to the relative inaccuracy of my math ; that is, I worked only
to slide rule accuracy which is not extremely precise. The mathematicians have a
name for what was done to finally draw the grid ; it is a conversion from polar (or
circular ) to rectangular (or grid -like) coordinates. The actual conversion was in
changing the locations of our five points as expressed on the circumference of a
circle to their locations on a rectilinear grid , as is latitude and longitude by plane
sailing. Let me go through the steps leading to the formation of the grid so that
you will see what I mean.
      1 . We are given the locations of the five points with respect to another point
(Syene). These positions are given in terms of distance ( radius of circle ) and in
terms of angles. This relationship in terms of angles and distances is called polar
(Syene being the pole here). We also know the location of Syene in latitude and
          —
longitude the rectangular system . This is the key to our finding the latitude and
longitude locations of the five points; it is the starting point .
      2. As seen in the figure, we are able to find the latitude and longitude of each
point in turn using our known distance and angle from Svenc and applying a little
trigonometry. If you don ’t follow the math or my notation system , just take my
word for it . This gives us then the latitude and longitude of the five scattered points.
      3. If we consider these points to be on a chart, as they are, we may draw a
network of latitude and longitude lines through the points to the top and bottom

     * Frank Ryan  .
230    Maps of the Ancient Sea Kings
and to the sides of the chart to our ( now ) blank latitude and longitude scales. Thus,
we have five latitudes located on our latitude scale and five longitudes on our
longitude scale. Now we are in business. We next measure with a ruler the distance
on the chart between any two points on the latitude scale. Now we set up a simple
proportion to find the chart length of one degree of latitude:
                                     length between measured points
              Length of one degree =
                                     degrees between measured points

     And so we find the length of a degree of latitude on our latitude scale. We do
the exact thing over again with the longitude scale to find the length of one degree
of longitude on the chart .
     4. Now, knowing the length of a degree of latitude and longitude on the chart
scale, and knowing the latitudes and longitudes of five points, we can start at any
point and draw in our latitude and longitude grid with spacing to suit our purposes.
The latitudes and longitudes of our original five points should be the same as they
actually are when we use the grid which we have just constructed to find them .
     Why do we find some discrepancies on the Piri Re’is chart between the actual
(calculated ) positions of the points and the positions of these points as found using
the grid which Frank has drawn, after I have just proven that they must be the
same? Well, if the assumptions which we used to find the positions of the five
points are accurate, and if the points were originally drawn on the chart correctly,
then either the chart has physically distorted (shrunk , warped , etc.) through the
centuries, or the precision of the mathematics is not good enough . Actually, any of
these errors may be suspect :

                        a)   original assumptions inaccurate
                        b)   chart not drawn accurately
                        c)   chart distorted through age
                        d)   insufficient mathematical precision

     We can only hope to find where the error lies by comparing the positions of
known points as given on the chart with the actual positions of these points. In my
opinion , we will be able to find the cause of the error if enough such positions are
compared .
     After working with these minor problems and eventually solving them we
hope, the BIG QUESTION still remains; who drew the original chart (s)? I wonder if
we ever will know.
     I received the package which you sent me, and I am working on it. There is
certainly much food for thought there, before I can reply with anything definite.
                                                             I’ll see you later,
                                                                               DICK
                                                                       NOTES 231


    Note 9: Nordenskiold’ s Comment
            on the Projection of
            Marinus of Tyre
     Referring to the projection of Marinus of Tyre, which he identifies with
Ptolemy’s equidistant - rectangular, or equidistant-cylindrical projection, Norden -
skiold remarks :
      For the sake of brevity I shall name this projection after Marinus of Tyre, who,
according to Ptolemy, used it for his charts, but I suppose that it had already been
employed by earlier, unknown cartographers. The meridians and parallels arc equidistant
straight lines, forming right angles to each other, and so drawn that the proper ratio
between the degrees of latitude and longitude are maintained on the map’s mean or
main parallel. When the equator is selected for this purpose the net of graduation be-
comes quadratic. The 26 special maps in all older manuscripts of Ptolemy are drawn
on this projection . . . . ( 147:85)

     There may well be some connection between the oblong grids found by us on
the Piri Re’is and Chinese maps, and in the Spanish sector of the Ben Zara Map,
and the projection described here by Nordenskiold . In this connection our solution
of the De Canerio Map raises a problem , for in its case a solution by spherical
trigonometry yielded a similar oblong grid .




    Note 10: Route of the Norwegian-
             British- Swedish
             Expedition Across Queen
             Maud Land
      The expedition , with equipment for taking depth soundings through the ice
cap, left Maudheim , on the coastal ice shelf , at 71° S. Lat., and 11 ° W . Long ,
( just northeast of Cape Norvegia ) . They crossed some shelf ice in an east-
southeasterly direction , and reached the 500-meter contour line of the continental
ice cap at 71.5° S., and 7° W . Directly east of here, at distances of 4 and 5 degrees
were the Witte Peaks and Stein’s Nunataks. Slightly to the northeast, at a distance
of 3 degrees of longitude were the Passat and Boreas Nunataks. These were all
comparatively low features. Here the expedition was 150 kilometers from Maud -
heim . The profile showed that for another fifty kilometers the surface of the conti-
nent was below sea level. At one point ( A, in Fig . 48) the ice extended 1 ,000 meters
below sea level.
      Just before the expedition reached the 1,000-meter contour, they passed over
a subglacial “island ” rising a couple of hundred meters above sea level. This island
232 Maps of the Ancient Sea Kings
would be at 6° W . and 71° 40' S. and would measure about 30 km . across. Beyond
this, to the 1,000- meter contour, the surface was again below sea level, for about
40 km . ( B on Fig. 48).
      Just after the 1,000-meter contour, the subglacial surface rose steeply above
sea level, reaching an altitude under the ice of about 750 meters, or about half a
mile. The expedition was now ( when the surface came above sea level ) about
225 km . from Maudheim . At 280 km . from Maudheim the surface again dipped
below sea level (C on Fig . 48) . The subglacial mountain , or mountain range,
indicated here lay approximately in Lat . 72° S., and Long. 5-6° W., and was about
55 km . across from northwest to southeast . A relatively slight change in sea level
(about 200 meters ) from depression of the land or rise of the sea could have
divided this land mass into two islands.
      About 120 km . farther on , the group began to pass over a higher submerged
mountain range. They established an advance base at a point where a mountain
peak just reached the surface of the ice cap, still at an altitude of about 1 ,000
meters. This was in 72.3° S. Lat., and 3.5° W . Long. About 20 miles beyond this
point the Regula Mountains were reached , with peaks rising to elevations of about
two miles. The submerged mountains were certainly a part of the Regula Moun -
tains covered by the ice. Three times more, after this, the surface dipped below
sea level, indicating subglacial “ islands.” Naturally, the party traveled on the
surface of the ice cap, and did not climb the peaks that showed above the surface
of the ice eastward and westward of their line of march . At one point they were
forced to detour to the west to avoid a high mountain , Shubert Peak ( 2,710 meters).
To the west of them they passed Mount Ropke ( 2, 280 meters) , and farther on they
passed Speiss Peak ( 2,420 meters ) about 20 miles to the west . After this they
reached Penck Trough , where again the surface dipped below sea level , and then
reached the Neumeyer Escarpment, at an elevation of 2, 500 meters, the beginning
of the interior plateau . They had crossed New Schwabenland . The route ended
in 74.3° S. and 0.'5 ° E. at a point where the ice surface was about 2,700 meters
above sea level.
      If the southern part of the Piri Re’is Map represents this coast, then it shows
terrain a considerable distance in both directions from this line. It shows the sea
advanced to the base of the Neumeyer Escarpment, and the various mountains as
islands. Toward the east a number of inland mountain ranges are shown , while
to the west a peninsula may represent what is now Cape Norvegia or Maudheim
 ( A in Fig. 48). If the inland mountain ranges are the Muhlig-IIofmann and
Wholthat Ranges, then the Piri Re’is Map shows the Antarctic coast from about
10° W. to 15° E. longitude.
                                                                       NOTES 233


    Note 11: Stnachan on the Oronteus
             Finaeus Projection
                                                                 19 AGASSIZ STREET
                                                                 CAMBRIDGE, MASS .
                                                                 29 September, 1962
Professor Charles Hapgood
Keene Teachers College
Keene, New Hampshire

DEAR CHARLIE,
      I was very interested to have the opportunity to see for the first time a picture
of the Oronteus Finaeus Map of 1531. The chart projection, as Nordenskiold
clearly states, and again as noted by Captain Burroughs, is the Cordiform Projec-
tion . This projection appears to be some modified form of the simple conic pro-
jection; the parallels of latitude are circles centered at the pole and equally spaced
as in the conic; however, the meridians are curved ( with the exception of the 90 th )
in the Finaeus while being straight in the simple conic. The meridional curvature
is designed to minimize the area distortion of the projection . Nordenskiold credits
Ptolemy’s “homeother ” projection as the basis for the cordiform . In any event the
Cordiform Projection is probably derived mathematically, requiring the use of
geometry and trigonometry to transcribe accurately the features of the earth ( i.e.,
a sphere) onto it.
      Coming to the main question at hand, we ask how did Oronteus Finaeus draw
his map? It is apparent that Oronteus used some earlier source map. This we must
concede. We must presume that the source map was equipped with a grid of some
sort; it must have had one to have been drawn originally and there would seem
to be no reason to have removed it. The simplest method of transferring a map
or figure from one grid to another is by point to point transference. That is to say,
a point located at a given latitude and longitude on the source map must be
relocated to the same latitude and longitude on the secondary grid , regardless of
the relative shapes of the grids. This process does not require knowledge of cartog-
raphy or mathematics; any child can do it . This appears to me to be a logical
method of transcription , and is the way that I would do it . Notice that this neither
involves nor introduces in any way any new knowledge. It is merely a way of
transplanting data from one grid to another and does not depend upon the shapes
of the grids, or upon any method by which the original intelligence was placed upon
the primary grid . By this theory, Oronteus Finaeus could not have correctly located
the South Pole as nearly as he did by his own knowledge. He merely placed it as
shown on his source map. And he need not have known a bit of mathematics to
have accomplished this job.
      Does this help?
                                                                 Sincerely yours,
                                                                      ( DICK )
                                                             RICHARD W . STRACHAN
234 Maps of the Ancient Sea Kings


    Note 12 : A Comment by
              Nordenskiold on the
              First World Map of
               ronteus Finaeus
     Several years before the publication of the cordiform map [his map of 1538]
Oronteus Finaeus had constructed another map also on Werner’s second projec-
tion, but modified in such a manner that the map of the world here is divided into
two parts, the one embracing the northern hemisphere, with the North Pole for a
centre of the parallel circles, and the other, the southern hemisphere, with the
South Pole as a centre. It is of this map that a facsimile is given on PI. XLI [our
Fig. 49]. It is dated 1531, but is generally found inserted in Novus Orbis Regionem
ac Insularum veteribus incognitarum , Parisiis, 1532. It was afterwards reprinted
from the same block, but with a new title legend from which the name of Oronteus
was omitted , in the edition of the Geography of Glareanus printed Brisgae 1536,
and in an edition of Pomponius Mela , Parisiis apud Christianum W echelum 1540.
                                                                         '



     “The map of Oronteus Finaeus finally had the honour of being copied, al-
though with some modifications, by Gerard Mercator, for one of his first maps, of
which I give a facsimile on Plate XLIII. . . . (147)



    Note 13 : A Possible Connection
              Between the Oronteus
              Finaeus Map of 1538 and
              the Hadji Ahmed
              Map of 1553
     Nordenskiold suggests that the 1538 map of Oronteus Finaeus may have
served as a model for the Hadji Ahmed Map of 1559:
      It is evident that the original map of Finaeus also served as a model for the large
Turkish Cordiform Map engraved on wood at Venice by Hhaggy Ahhmed from Tunis,
and dated year 967 of the Mohammedan chronology, which corresponds with our year
1559. The blocks for this map, which , for some reason or other, had been sequestrated ,
probably before the issue of the print, were discovered in 1795 in the depositaries of
the Venetian Council of Ten , and are now preserved at the Biblioteca Marciana . This
discovery seems to have produced a certain sensation . It gave rise to a whole literature
introduced by a paper of Abbe Simon Assimani, and to various fables concerning the
manner in which the old blocks came into the possession of the Venetian Government.
( 147 :89 )
    Despite Nordenskiold’s view expressed here, a close comparison of the two
maps appears to me to reveal many more points of difference than of agreement.
                                                                     NOTES 235


    Note 1A : Hough’s Interpretation
              of the Ross Sea Cores
     The log of core N- 5 shows glacial marine sediment from the present to 6,000
years ago. From 6,000 to 15,000 years ago the sediment is fine-grained with the
exception of one granule at about 12,000 years ago. This suggests an absence of
ice from the area during that period , except perhaps for a stray iceberg 12,000
years ago. Glacial marine sediment occurs from 15,000 to 29, 500 years ago; then
there is a zone of fine-grained sediment from 30,000 to 40,000 years ago, again sug-
gesting an absence of ice from the sea . From 40,000 to 133, 500 years ago there is
glacial marine material, divided into two zones of coarse- and two zones of medium -
grained texture.
     The period 133,000-173,000 years ago is represented by fine-grained sediment,
approximately half of which is finely laminated . Isolated pebbles occur at 140,000,
147,000, and 156,000 years. This zone is interpreted as recording a time during
which the sea at this station was ice free, except for a few stray bergs , when the
three pebbles were deposited . The laminated sediment may represent seasonal
outwash from glacial ice on the Antarctic continent .
     Glacial marine sediment is present from 173,000 to 350,000 years ago, with
some variation in the texture. Laminated fine-grained sediments from 350,000 to
420,000 years ago may again represent rhythmic deposition of outwash from
Antarctica in an ice-free sea . The bottom part of the core contains glacial marine
sediment dated from 420,000 to 460,000 years by extrapolation of the time scale
from the younger part of the core (96: 257-59).




    Note 15 : Gerard Mercator
     Gerard Kramer (1512-1594), who took the name of Gerardus Mercatorius,
and is known as Mercator, was the leading cartographer of the 16th Century and
the founder of scientific cartography. He deserves this title because of his inven -
tion of the famous “ Mercator Projection,” still the most widely used of all map
projections, especially for purposes of navigation.
                                  —
     According to Asimov (16: 58 59) Mercator was at first under the influence
of Ptolemy. However, he seems to have abandoned the Ptolemaic ideas sometime
after he established a center for geographical studies at Louvain in 1534. From a
comparison of his maps with the portolan charts, it is my impression that he
probably abandoned Ptolemy because he realized the superiority of the porto-
lanos. It seems evident, not only from his maps of the Antarctic, but also from
his maps of South America, that he made use of the ancient maps. It would seem ,
in the latter case, that he used an ancient map in 1538, but abandoned it in favor
of the explorers’ accounts in his 1569 Atlas.
     Mercator’s maps were unique in their artistry. They incorporated , however,
the 16th Century misconception of the size of the earth , as we have seen . In
236     Maps of the Ancient Sea Kings
consequence, his distances are in fact less accurate than those of the ancient
maps, which were based on a comparatively accurate estimate of the circum -
ference. Mercator, then , while he laid the basis for modern scientific cartography,
did not attain the technical level of the ancients.
     It would be a matter of great interest to discover his source maps . In the
hope of doing so, my student, Alfred Isroe, transferred from Keene State College
to the University of Amsterdam, and spent a considerable time during the aca -
demic year 1964-1965 in a search for them . Despite the excellent cooperation of
the Dutch authorities, the search was fruitless, and it appears that the source
maps may have perished . If so, this would be only one more instance of the careless
treatment of ancient manuscripts of practical or scientific value in the Renaissance.
The humanists devoted themselves to collecting and restoring the manuscripts of
ancient classical literature, but their interest rarely extended to physical science.
Between the religious frenzy of the Reformation and the aristocratic bias of the
humanists, the printing presses, as already mentioned , were largely monopolized
by non -scientific material. Thus, the Renaissance was not only an age of recovery
of ancient learning, but also possibly a period in which a large part of the scientific
heritage of the past was lost .




      Note 16 : Attempts to Adapt the
                Twelve - Wind System
                to the Compass
     N. H. de Vaudrey Heathecote, B.S., of University College, London , in an
essay on Early Nautical Charts (89) found references to the use of the twelve-wind
system on the compass. After discussing the usual 32-point compass card , he says :

       Another system appears to have been in use in which the “ wind ” was divided , not
into four quarter-winds, but into six “sixth -winds,” so that there were two points on
the compass card between , for example, N.W. and N.N.W., instead of the single
point corresponding to N .W. by N . I have myself seen only one chart marked according
to this division of the compass; it is one contained in a collection of charts by various
Venetian cartographers of the second half of the fifteenth century ( British Museum
MS., Egerton 73, fol. 36). Breusing says ( Breusing, “ La Toleta de Marteloio,” Zeitsch .
f . wiss. Geog. 2, 129) that this was the French system . It strikes one as less convenient
than the Mediterranean system , and certainly does not appear to have been in very
wide use.
                                                                          NOTES 237


    Note 17: Clagett on Science
             in Antiquity
        On Egyptian Geometry:
        The most advanced of the Egyptian mathematical achievements were in geom -
etry.   ...
     The Egyptians knew how to determine the areas and volumes of a number of
figures; they could find the area of a triangle and a trapezium , the volume of a cylin  -
drical granary and of the frustrum of a square pyramid , and perhaps even the area of
the surface of a hemisphere ( although the last is doubtful ) . Their proficiency in geom-
etry was certainly fostered by their high development in architectural engineering and
surveying. . . . ( 52 : 26 )

        On Babylonian Mathematics:
      When we turn to Mesopotamia , we find from at least 1800 B.C. a Babylonian
mathematics more highly developed than the Egyptian . Although it too had strong
empirical roots that are clearly present in most of the tablets that have been published,
it certainly seems to have tended to a more theoretical expression . The key to the ad-
vances made by the Babylonians in mathematics appears to have been their remarkably
facile number system , which demands brief characterization .
      ( 1 ) Although it had certain features of both the decimal and sexagesimal systems,
it was   primarily a sexagesimal system . That is to say, it was based on sixty and powers
of sixty.
      ( 2) It was a system highly general and abbreviatory in character. All numbers
could be made with only two symbols, v = 1 and <C = 10. Using these symbols
the numbers from 1 to 59 can be represented thus : w = 2; <C <£ v = 21; etc. Numer-
ous tricks were used to save writing all the symbols out in a string. Not only could these
symbols be used to represent numbers from 1 to 59, but they could also be used to write
the numbers 1 to 59 times any power of 60. Thus, unless one knew what order of
magnitude was being considered from the details of the problem being worked, he
could not know whether the two symbols <C <H              by themselves on a tablet without
supporting text equalled 20, or 20 X 60, or 20 X 602, or 20 X 60 -1, etc.
      What is more, these same symbols changed their value as their position changed ;
that is to say, this system was a place-value system , as is our own decimal system. In
our system as the symbol changes position in the following numbers it changes its
value in that it stands for a higher power of ten : 00.1, 1, 10, 100, etc. So in the num -
ber v <£. v the symbol v has the value of 1 in the last position and sixty the first
position , the whole number being 71 ( if the v in the last position represents 60, then
the v in the first position represents 602 and the whole number is 4260 : 602 plus
11 X 60 ) .
      It was not until very late that the Babylonian system developed what in the decimal
                      —
system is called zero i.e., a sign for the absence of any units of a given power of ten
indicated by position ; thus in our system 101 means of course one hundred , no tens,
and one unit. Instead of using that sign we could agree that we would simply leave a
space, writing 1 1. This was done until the very last stages of the Babylonian system ,
when a zero sign or its equivalent was developed . . . .
238      Maps of the Ancient Sea Kings
      Freed from the drudgery of calculation by this really remarkable system of calcu-
lation  . . . the Babylonians made extraordinary advances in algebra. . . . ( 52 : 28-30 )
     B. L. van der Waerden sums up the characteristics of Babylonian astronomy
thus :
     . . . The fundamental ideas of Babylonian Astronomy are: the idea of the periodi-
cal return of celestial phenomena, the artificial division of the Zodiac into 12 signs of
30 degrees each , the use of longitude and latitude as coordinates of stars and planets,
and the approximation of empirical functions by linear, quadratic and cubic functions,
computed by means of arithmetical progressions of first, second , and third order. ( 216: 50 )

      Needham notes the early appearance in China of a number system with
affinities to the Babylonian :

     . . . Decimal place-value and blank space for the zero had begun in the land of
the Yellow River earlier than anywhere else, and decimal metrology had gone along
with it. By the first century B.C. Chinese artisans were checking their work with sliding
calipers decimally graduated . Chinese mathematical thought was always profoundly
algebraic; not geometrical. . . . ( 145:118-119)

      We see here suggestions that Babylonian and Chinese science were linked,
either through contemporary contacts or through inheritance from a common
source.
      Taking Babylonian , Chinese, Egyptian, and Greek science together, we may
note that there was a very considerable development of geometry in Egypt, but
apparently no algebra . There was a remarkable development of algebra in Babylo-
nia and in China , but no special development of geometry. Remarkable likenesses
existed in the number systems of Babylonia and China , but this number system
had no similarity to that of Egypt.
      We have seen that the science reflected in the maps implies, however, the
possession of all of these elements by one culture. Geometry is present in the porto-
lan design; the Babylonian division of the Zodiac is present in the twelve-wind
system ; so are the units of sixty (six units of sixty in the circle). The included deci-
mal system for counting the 360 degrees of the circle are present in the Oronteus
Finaeus Map ( for, as we have seen , the 80th parallel must have been drawn on
that map by the people who mapped Antarctica ).
      Is it possible that what we have here is evidence that all these different scien -
tific achievements were once the possesions of the unknown people who originally
drew these maps, and that, in the dissolution of their culture, various remnants
survived , some in one place, some in another? Let us suppose that a “carrier people”
—                                                               —
   an intermediary people ( like the seafaring Phoenicians) were the ones to inherit
all these aspects of science from the ancient source. Let us further suppose that
the “ carrier people” brought this science, by trade contacts, separately to our known
civilizations of antiquity; the Babylonians and the Chinese took some elements
of this ancient heritage, the Egyptians others, and American Indian peoples per -
haps still others. We must not, of course, omit India . It is here, apparently, that
our symbol for zero appeared , and it is in India more than in any other country
on earth that the traditions of an ancient great world civilization are still preserved .
                                                                      NOTES 239


    Note 18: Einstein on the Theoryx of
             Earth' s Shifting Crust '
                                      x




      I frequently receive communications from people who wish to consult me
concerning their unpublished ideas . It goes without saying that these ideas are
very seldom possessed of scientific validity. The very first communication , however,
that I received from Mr. Hapgood electrified me. His idea is original , of great sim -
           —                               —
plicity, and if it continues to prove itself of great importance to everything that
is related to the history of the earth’s surface.
      A great many empirical data indicate that at each point on the earth’s surface
that has been carefully studied , many climatic changes have taken place, appar -
ently quite suddenly. This, according to Hapgood , is explicable if the virtually
rigid outer crust of the earth undergoes, from time to time, extensive displacement
over the viscous, plastic, possibly fluid inner layers. Such displacements may take
place as the consequence of comparatively slight forces exerted on the crust , de-
rived from the earth’s momentum of rotation , which in turn will tend to alter the
axis of rotation of the earth’s crust .
      In a polar region there is continual deposition of ice, which is not symmetri-
cally distributed about the pole. The earth’s rotation acts on these unsymmetrically
deposited masses, and produces centrifugal momentum that is transmitted to the
rigid crust of the earth . The constantly increasing centrifugal momentum pro-
duced in this way will, when it has reached a certain point, produce a movement
of the earth ’s crust over the rest of the earth’s body, and this will displace the
polar regions toward the equator.
      Without a doubt the earth ’s crust is strong enough not to give way propor-
tionately as the ice is deposited . The only doubtful assumption is that the earth ’s
crust can be moved easily enough over the inner layers.
      The author has not confined himself to a simple presentation of this idea .
He has also set forth , cautiously and comprehensively, the extraordinarily rich
material that supports his displacement theory. I think that this rather astonishing,
even fascinating, idea deserves the serious attention of anyone who concerns him-
self with the theory of the earth’s development .
      To close with an observation that has occurred to me while writing these
lines : If the earth’s crust is really so easily displaced over its substratum as this
theory requires, then the rigid masses near the earth’s surface must be distributed
in such a way that they give rise to no other considerable centrifugal momentum ,
which would tend to displace the crust by centrifugal effect . I think that this
deduction might be capable of verification , at least approximately. This centrifugal
 momentum should in any case be smaller than that produced by the masses of
deposited ice.



    * The Foreword Dr. Albert Einstein wrote for “ Earth’s Shifting Crust,” by
Charles H. Hapgood. New York: Pantheon , 1958.
240     Maps of the Ancient Sea Kings


      Note 19 : Cummings on the
                Pyramid of Cuicuilco
     In his pamphlet ( 56 : 40) Cummings, after describing the excavation of suc-
cessive pavements about the Pyramid of Cuicuilco, writes :

      . . . These six pavements, with  their six corresponding shrines, all lying at differ-
ent levels below the carbonized stratum that indicates the time of the eruption of
Xitli and the coming of the Pedrigal, speak in a language that is clear and convincing.
The lowest pavement lies more than 18 feet below the surface. Eighteen feet of
gradual fill on top and 12 to 20 feet of debris overlying the base, all accumulated prob-
ably before the Christian era , and the composite condition of the structure itself , be-
speak a lapse of time that pushes its builders back into the dim beginnings of things
in the Valley of Mexico.

    Cummings’ further comments on the probable age of the pyramid should be
quoted in full .
                      THE GREAT AGE OF THE TEMPLE
     Cuicuilco tells its own story quite clearly. Its crude Cyclopean masonry without
mortar of any kind , its massive conical form , and its great elevated causeways for ap-
proach instead of staircases, all demonstrate that the structure was the work of primitive
men , and that its builders hardly knew the rudiments of architecture. Its base lies buried
beneath from 15 to 20 feet of accumulated debris, which in turn was covered with
three lava flows that have crowded around its slopes and piled up upon each other in
rapid succession to the depth of 10 to 20 feet . The old temple had been so completely
covered with rock and soil , volcanic ash and pumice in successive strata that the noses
of the lava streams as they pushed around the mound and crawled up its slopes were
nowhere able to touch the walls of the ancient structure. Centuries must have elapsed
and several eruptions of old Ajusco must have buried its platforms and slopes under
successive mantles of ash and pumice before Xitli poured fourth its baptisms of fire .
Two and a half to 3 feet of surface soil have accumulated above this scorched and
blackened stratum that marks the footprints of Xitli’s consuming blasts . Careful meas-
urements were taken in several places of this accumulation since the eruption of Xitli,
and of the accumulation directly beneath between the pavement surrounding the
temple and the blackened stratum just underlying the lava , and the story was always the
same. If it has taken 2,000 years for the deposit to form since the eruption of Xitli , then
by the same yardstick it took some 6, 500 years for the debris beneath the lava to have
accumulated , and so Cuicuilco fell into ruins some 8, 500 years ago. But some will say ,
“ What evidence have we that the deposit overlying the structure beneath the lava did
not form rapidly on account of successive showers of volcanic ash ? ” True, volcanic
deposits played their part , but the presence of three strata of rock and organic soil con -
taining stone implements, pottery and figurines of three quite different types of work -
manship, and separated by two thick barren strata of volcanic ash and pumice mingled
with streaks of sand , indicates the passing of centuries rather than months or years.
The two massive enlargements of the temple, and the repeated reinforcement of the
                                                                            NOTES      241
great causeways leading to the top of the structure, represent no brief period of the
active use of this ancient center of religious ceremonials. The presence of 1836 feet of
deposit on top of the original platform , and the six successive pavements with their
corresponding platforms or altars, all buried therein before Xitli erupted , demonstrates
further the long use of this lofty pile as a sacred gathering place. The late Mrs. Nuthall ,
a noted Aztec scholar , found that the word Cuicuilco, signified a place for singing and
dancing. Everything about the structure bears out that interpretation . Here men and
women met to pay tribute to the great spirits who, they thought , controlled their lives
and their destinies. Here they danced and sang in honor of their gods and for the benefit
of their fellow men seemingly through many centuries of time. Cuicuilco stands out
as a monument to the religious zeal and to the organized power and perseverance of
the earliest inhabitants of the Valley of Mexico. It is a great temple that records devo-
tion to their gods and subservience to the will of great leaders. It shows the beginning
of that architecture that developed into the pyramids and altars of Teotihuacan . It
certainly gives evidence of being the oldest temple yet uncovered on the American con -
tinent. Everything about it so far revealed bears out its great antiquity, and it should
serve as a strong incentive to the further investigation of the archaic culture of Mexico.




    Note 20: Bnogger on an Ancient
           “Golden Age ” of Navigation
     Vilhjalmur Stefansson (192) mentioned a reference by a Norwegian historian
to a great age of navigation in ancient times :
      To those of us brought up in the pedagogic tradition of forty and more years ago,
where navigation of the high seas was supposed to have started with the Phoenicians,
it is more than a little against the grain to believe that man swarmed over at least
three of the oceans, the Atlantic, Indian , and Pacific, during remote periods. In fact,
about the only group of scholars to whom that type of thinking appears to be natural
or ingrained is the archaeologists, particularly those who devote themselves to the late
Stone and various Bronze ages. . . .
      Professor A. W. Brogger created no great stir, or at least aroused no storm of
protest, when at an international congress of archaeologists at Oslo in 1936 he lectured ,
as president of the congress, about a golden age of deep-sea navigation which he thinks
may have been at its height as much as three thousand years before Christ and which
was on the decline after 1 500 B.C., so that the very period which we used to select as
the beginning of real seamanship, the Phoenician , is shown as having been ( by that
theory ) at the bottom of a curve, which thereafter rose slowly until it attained a new
high in the navigational cycle of the Viking Age which started less than fifteen hundred
years ago.
      That man of the Old World discovered the Americas, from Brazil to Greenland ,
during Brogger’s golden age of navigation five thousand years ago, and perhaps earlier,
rests merely on possibilities and probabilities. As yet we cannot prove it certain ,
though we can prove it likely.
242 Maps of the Ancient Sea Kings


       Note 21: Representations of the
                Constellations as
                Denoters of Latitudes on
                the Piri Re ’is Map
      In the light of the apparent connection of the twelve-wind system with the
signs of the ancient Babylonian zodiac, and because of various evidences that
sailors in ancient times used the constellations in navigation , it would not be par-
ticularly strange to find that the representations of the constellations were used
on ancient maps. Some of these representations seem to be suggested by the ships
and animals on the Piri Re’is Map.
     This suggestion was first made to me by the late Archibald T. Robertson , of
Boston , a scholar in the esoteric lore of ancient navigation and astronomy. He
suggested that Piri Re’is might have copied (and misinterpreted ) some of his ani-
mals and ships from the ancient source maps he used , adding others to suit his
fancy.
      Robertson suggested that the great snake shown in what we take to be Queen
Maud Land , Antarctica, may have originally been intended to represent the con -
stellation Hydra ( the Snake), a constellation which is visible in the southern sky
(during the spring equinox of the Northern Hemisphere) only in Latitude 70°-72°
South , the correct latitude of the Queen Maud Land coast . The ship lying off the
coast of what looks like Argentina , he suggested , might represent the constellation
Argo ( the Ship), visible at that season in Latitude 55° South , as would be correct .
Following this line of reasoning, we might suggest that other ancient constella -
tions might be represented by the bull in the center of Brazil (Taurus) and the
wolf -like creature in the south ( Lupus ). The bull is shown in the equatorial region
of Brazil, which would be correct, since Taurus is an animal of the Zodiac.*
     It would be natural for Piri Re’is, or any other Arab, Medieval , or Renaissance
mapmaker, to misunderstand these figures on the ancient source maps, and to
take them for references to historical events or local fauna . It would be natural
for them to add others of their own , which , as we have seen , Piri Re’is did . For
the unfamiliar ships on the source maps, he might have quite naturally substituted
those he knew, the ships of the I 6th Century, connecting them with known or
presumed historical events, such as the voyages of St . Brendan and Diaz. He seems
also to have drawn upon the medieval bestiaries for fabulous animals, in accord -
ance with the habits of mapmakers of his day.




sun.                                                               —
       * The Zodiac was confined to the equatorial constellations the path of the
                                                                     NOTES 243


   Note 22: Ohlmeyer and Burroughs
            Correspondence
       8 RECONNAISSANCE TECHNICAL SQUADRON (SAC)
                UNITED STATES AIR FORCE
                   WESTOVER AIR FORCE BASE
                        MASSACHUSETTS
Reply to
Attn of : RTC                                                           6 July 1960


SUBJECT : Admiral Piri Reis World Map

To: Professor Charles H. Hapgood
    Keene Teachers College
    Keene, New Hampshire
     DEAR PROFESSOR HAPGOOD:
          Your request for evaluation of certain unusual features of the Piri Reis
     World Map of 1513 by this organization has been reviewed .
          The claim that the lower part of the map portrays the Princess Martha
     Coast of Queen Maud Land Antarctica, and the Palmer Peninsula is reason -
     able. We find this is the most logical and in all probability the correct inter-
     pretation of the map.
          The geographical detail shown in the lower part of the map agrees very
     remarkably with the results of the Seismic profile made across the top of the
     ice cap by the Swedish - British - Norwegian Antarctic Expedition of 1949.
          This indicates the coastline had been mapped before it was covered by
     the ice cap.
          The ice cap in this region is now about a mile thick . We have no idea
     how the data on this map can be reconciled with the supposed state of
     geographical knowledge in 1513.

     HAROLD Z. OHLMEYER
     Lt . Colonel , USAF
     Commander
244    Maps of the Ancient Sea Kings

       8TH RECONNAISSANCE TECHNICAL SQUADRON (SAC)
                 UNITED STATES AIR FORCE
                 WESTOVER AIR FORCE BASE, MASS .
                                                                            14 Aug 61

Mr. Charles H. Hapgood
Keene Teachers College
Keene, N.H.

DEAR PROFESSOR HAPGOOD:

      It is not very often that we have an opportunity to evaluate maps of ancient
origin . The Piri Reis ( 1513) and Oronteus Fineaus [sic] ( 1531) maps sent to us
by you, presented a delightful challenge, for it was not readily conceivable that
they could be so accurate without being forged . With added enthusiasm we
accepted this challenge and have expended many off duty hours evaluating your
manuscript and the above maps . I am sure you will be pleased to know we have
concluded that both of these maps were compiled from accurate original source
maps, irrespective of dates. The following is a brief summary of our findings:
     a . The solution of the portolano projection used by Admiral Piri Reis, de-
veloped by your class in Anthropology, must be very nearly correct; for when
known geographical locations are checked in relationship to the grid computed by
Mr. Richard W. Strachan ( MIT ), there is remarkably close agreement . Piri Reis’
use of the portolano projection (centered on Syene, Egypt ) was an excellent choice,
for it is a developable surface that would permit the relative size and shape of the
earth (at that latitude) to be retained . It is our opinion that those who compiled
the original map had an excellent knowledge of the continents covered by this map.
      b . As stated by Colonel Harold Z. Ohlmeyer in his letter ( July 6, 1960) to you ,
the Princess Martha Coast of Queen Maud Land , Antarctica , appears to be truly
represented on the southern sector of the Piri Reis Map. The agreement of the
Piri Reis Map with the seismic profile of this area made by the Norwegian - British -
Swedish Expedition of 1949, supported by your solution of the grid , places beyond
a reasonable doubt the conclusion that the original source maps must have been
made before the present Antarctic ice cap covered the Queen Maud Land coasts.
     c. It is our opinion that the accuracy of the cartographic features shown in
the Oronteus Fineaus [sic] Map ( 1531) suggests, beyond a doubt, that it also was
compiled from accurate source maps of Antarctica , but in this case of the entire con -
tinent. Close examination has proved the original source maps must have been com -
piled at a time when the land mass and inland waterways of the continent were
relatively free of ice. This conclusion is further supported by a comparison of the
Oronteus Fineaus [sic] Map with the results obtained by International Geophysi-
cal Year teams in their measurements of the subglacial topography. The compari-
son also suggests that the original source maps (compiled in remote antiquity ) were
prepared when Antarctica was presumably free of ice. The Cordiform Projection
used by Oronteus Fineaus [sic] suggests the use of advanced mathematics. Further,
the shape given to the Antarctic continent suggests the possibility, if not the
                                                                       NOTES      245
probability, that the original source maps were compiled on a stereographic or
gnomonic type of projection ( involving the use of spherical trigonometry ).
     d . We are convinced that the findings made by you and your associates are
valid , and that they raise extremely important questions affecting geology and
ancient history, questions which certainly require further investigation .
     We thank you for extending us the opportunity to have participated in the
study of these maps . The following officers and airmen volunteered their time to
assist Captain Lorenzo W . Burroughs in this evaluation : Captain Richard E.
Covault, CWO Howard D. Minor, MSgt Clifton M. Dover, MSgt David C.
Carter, TSgt James H . Hood , SSgt James L. Carroll, and A1C Don R . Vance.
LORENZO W . BURROUGHS
Captain , USAF
Chief , Cartographic Section
8th Reconnaissance Technical Sqdn (SAC)
Westover Air Force Base, Massachusetts




    Note 23: The Vinland Map and
                                Ox
             theTartar Relation
     There has just been published , as this book goes to press, an account of the
discovery of a world map apparently drawn about 1450, showing a part of North
America . The story of the discovery of the map, as given in the press, is most inter -
esting, and the map itself is certainly evidence of medieval ( probably Norse) visits
to America before Columbus.
     The reader of this book will naturally want to know whether this new map
has any connection with the maps I have discussed . The answer is, no. The Vin -
land Map has no apparent connection with the ancient sea charts. Despite the
presence of America on it, it is a typical example of unscientific medieval cartog-
raphy. Land shapes, except for Greenland , are exceedingly inaccurate, even in the
Mediterranean . The map is further evidence for the fact we have repeatedly em -
         —
phasized that geographers of the Middle Ages were simply incapable of con -
structing the highly scientific portolan charts.
     The fact that the representation of Greenland is reasonably good may be
owing to the influence of the far superior Zeno Map of the North , which the Zeno
brothers are supposed to have drawn about sixty years earlier. I have presented
evidence to support the view that the Zeno map must have been a copy of an
ancient map originally drawn with the use of trigonometry, and must have been
based on a true knowledge of the size of the earth . The comparative accuracy of
the Vinland Map, then , as to Greenland , may be the result of the persisting
influence of the ancient cartography.

    * The Vinland Map and the Tartar Relation, Thomas E. Manston and George
D. Painter. New Haven : The Yale University Press, 1965.
246    Maps of the Ancient Sea Kings


      Note 24: Communication from the
               Turkish Embassy in
               Washington Regarding
               Piri Re ’is
                             TURKISH EMBASSY
                              WASHINGTON, D.C.

                                                                  January 28, 1965
Mr. Robert L. Merritt
Attorney at Law
Hippodrome Building
Cleveland 14, Ohio
DEAR MR . MERRITT,

      In reply to your letter of October 16, 1964, I am pleased to enclose a photo-
copy of the Piri Reis Map received recently from Ankara .
      To the best of our knowledge the original map has been drawn on gazelle hide.
      A short biographical information on Piri Reis is given below which we think
might be of interest to you .
      “ He was born at the town of Karaman , near Konya , Turkey. The exact date
of his birth is unknown . In his early youth he joined his uncle Kemal Reis, a well
known pirate. He distinguished himself during the operations of his uncle’s small
fleet on French and Venetian coasts. When Kemal Reis had abandoned piracy and
joined the Imperial Ottoman Fleet during the reign of Beyazit II (1481-1512 ) Piri
Reis followed suit and was appointed captain . The battles of Modon and Inebahti
( Lepanto) made him famous. According to historian Von Hammer, “ he gained an
awesome fame” for his deeds in these expeditions.
      “ Piri Reis, whose real name was Ahmet Muhiddin , stayed with the Ottoman
Fleet during the reigns of Yavuz Selim ( 1512-1520) and Suleiman the Magnificent
(1520-1566). He served as an aide to Barbaros Hayrettin Pasha , Great Admiral of
the Imperial Ottoman Fleet. In 1551 he was elevated to the rank of Commander
in Chief of the Fleet of Egypt, then a dependency of the Ottoman Empire. In an
expedition launched the same year with 31 vessels he seized the port of Masqat
on the Arap peninsula and laid siege to the islands of Hurmuz in the Persian Gulf .
The islanders offered him treasures, which he accepted as spoils of war and lifted
the siege. On his way back, news reached him that a powerful Portuguese fleet had
blockaded the entrance to the Persian Gulf . He loaded up all the treasures he had
gotten from the islanders on three ships and leaving the remaining 28 in Basra
he sailed to Istanbul. While passing through the Portuguese blockade he lost one
of his vessels but managed to return safely to Egypt with the other two. The
Governor of Egypt, one of his political opponents, misrepresented the facts to the
Emperor in Istanbul reporting that “ Piri Reis had returned with only 2 ships
though he sailed at the beginning with 31,” without mentioning the treasures he
                                                                      NOTES 247
had brought with him. Emperor Suleiman flew into a rage and in a fit of anger
ordered his execution , thus committing one of the very few fateful mistakes of his
46 years rule. Piri Reis was executed in Egypt in 1554.
                    —
     “ Kitabi Bahriye The Navy’s Book ,” which is the most famous of his works,
is considered as an excellent geography book of his times. He also prepared a map
of the world which has been reproduced in recent years. He wrote many poems
too.”
                                                                 Sincerely yours,
                                                                 Ali Suat Qakir
                                                                 Second Secretary




    Note 25: History of Navigation
             and Ship Building
      In the course of research on the maps, much attention was paid to ancient
navigation and ship building, particularly to the influence that the Phoenicians
may have exerted on the Greeks in these areas. For reasons of space it seemed best
to eliminate a detailed discussion of them in this volume, but some of the references
have been retained in the Bibliography ( Nos. 34, 38, 41, 49, 86, 99, 102, 114, 190,
211, 212, 213) .
Appendix

                 The Piri Reis Map: Mathematical
                 Considerations by Richard W. Strachan
                 Trigonometric projection based on the equator
                                          I
     The Piri Reis Map of 1513 is a typical portolano in appearance. The usual
portolan chart is characterized by groups of eight, sixteen , or thirty-two lines
radiating from one or more centers on the chart, like the spokes of a wheel . These
lines, or rhumbs, are equally spaced at angles of 45, 22 % or 11 % degrees apart .
It has hitherto been supposed that this system of radial lines originated as actual
course lines between various ports, that is, compass courses. It has not been sup-
posed that any mathematical system underlay these portolan charts.
     It is this assumption that has now been destroyed by the discoveries made
by Professor Hapgood and his students. They have proved that, in the cases of
several of these maps, the portolan design is based on geometry and may be
translated by plane or spherical trigonometry into the terms of modem latitudes
and longitudes.
                                         II
      In the case of thePiri Re’is  Map, Hapgood found that the five minor pro-
jection centers shown on the surviving fragment ( its western section ) evidently had
been placed on the perirrfeter of a circle with a center somewhere to the eastward
of the torn edge. Rhumbs from these points, when projected to the east, proved
to meet in Egypt at the intersection of the Tropic of Cancer with the Meridian
of Alexandria . It appeared from this that the complete map ( which included Asia )
may have had sixteen of these minor projection centers ( 22 % degrees apart ) on the
perimeter of the circle.
      A mathematician would consider this graphically as a polar (or circular ) type
of construction . The problem was to convert this polar projection into the rec-
tangular coordinate system which is used today. Reference points used in the
rectangular coordinate system are located by intersection of lines of latitude and
longitude, the lines which form the type of grid with which we are all familiar.
It is not difficult to convert from polar to rectangular coordinates provided several
points, angles, distances, or a combination of these factors are known . Hapgood
made the following assumptions:
                                                                                      APPENDIX 249

     1 . The center of the portolan grid was located at the intersection of the
Tropic of Cancer and the Meridian of Alexandria , that is, at 23° 30' N, 30° E.
     2. The radius from this center to the perimeter of the circle on which the
minor projection points are located is 69.5°, or 3° longer than the distance from
the Tropic of Cancer to the North Pole. The drawing of the projection involved,
then , an overestimate of the circumference of the earth amounting to about 4.5°.
     3. Projection Point III on the map was presumed to lie precisely on the
Equator.
     With these assumptions, we have enough information to solve for the geo-
graphical positions (latitude and longitude ) of all five projection points.*
    Sketching in the knowns and unknowns on a triangle as shown below, we
have :
                                                 b = unknown                              6Center
                                                                                          23.50 N
                 90°                                                         angle
        23.5°                                                unknown                      30.00 E
        of arc   a                               c
                                                           69 3°
                                                                '       ot
     Point 3                                tad'  uS
     00.00 N
            W


       As seen in the figure, we know the length of the two sides of the triangle
( which is a right triangle by construction ). We may solve for the unknown angle,
0 , first , and knowing 0 and the length of one side, we can find the length of side X,


                     _
which you can see is the latitude difference between the center and Point III . We
may solve as follows:
                     Sin 6     =   —
                                   a
                                   c
                                          23.50
                                          69.50 =
                                                  .3381             6   = 19.75
                     Then cos 0
                                           —
                                           b
                                         = c       b = c cos 6 = (69.5) (cos 19.75)

                                       b = (69.5K.94108) = 65.41 ° of arc
Subtracting the longitude of the center (since it is east Longitude) from the length
of side b, we find the longitude of Point 3.
                         So:                               65.41
                                                       -   30.00 E
                                                           35.41 W
Thus we have the position of Point 3 to be:
                                               00.00 N     ( given )
                                               35.41 W     (calculated )


    * It appeared, after a trial, that as between plane and spherical trigonometry,
plane trigonometry gave better results in terms of a grid fitting the geography.
Therefore, in this case, we have used plane trigonometry. (See Note 6)
250 Maps of the Ancient Sea Kings
     The calculations for the other points are slightly different. For these calcula-
tions we know the length of one side of a triangle (which we construct ), and the
angle 6 , which we find by addition or subtraction knowing the original 6 , and
knowing that the angles between the rhumb lines are 22 % °. The solution for Point
II is illustrated :

       point II                                    c = 69.5
             a 90°                               e2                                  Center
                                                                                     23.5 N
                                                      b                              30.0 E

                                                      e


       point III

                                  02 =   22.5 -    e = 22.50 - 19.75 =      2.75
Then
                          a = c sin      e2   = (69.50)( .04798 ) = 3.335 ° of arc

and latitude of Point 2 equals:
                                         23.50   + 3.34 = 26.84 °    N
also
                          b = c cos       e 2 = (69.5)(.99885) = 69.42 ° of arc
and longitude of Point 2 equals:
                                         69.42 - 30.00 = 39.42 ° W

The positions of the remaining points are:
                       Point                     Latitude                Longitude

                         1                      53.15 N                  32.86   W
                         2                      26.84 N                  39.42   W
                         3                      00.0                     35.41   W
                         4                      23.09 S                  21.45   W
                         5                      39.36 S                   0.35   E


                                                          III
     Knowing the positions of the five points, it is necessary to know only one
more thing to be able to construct the rectangular coordinate grid . This is the
direction of True North on the Piri Reis Map. Once Hapgood and his co-workers
had established the North direction, it was a simple matter to draw in a grid ,
merely using the lines indicated on the map itself , which intersect the five pro-
jection points, running North -South or East-West.
                                                                                                    APPENDIX 251
     Supplement to Mathematical Considerations : In calculating the positions of
the five Projection Points on the Piri Re’is Map, based on the pole [see Fig . 17]
we would proceed as follows for the new grid :
        (1 ) Assume center position 23.5 N, 30.0 E.
        ( 2 ) Assume length of radius, 69.5 degrees                      .
        (3) Assume (decide from geometry I should say ) point II to be on same latitude as tropic
              and center, i.e., rhumb from pt II goes through center, must be same latitude.
        ( 4)    Find longitude of point II .

                                                         radius length      = 69.5
                                pt II                                                      23.5 N
                                     23.5 N                                                30. E
                                      ? longitude

                                longitude ( X )              = 69.5°    —    30 ° E   =   39.5° W

                                             L   = 23.5° N     from map

        (5)     Do other points similar to last time:

               pt I                 tedius 69.5
                                                                 c
                          b
                                                                a                                    23.5 N
      pt II
                                                                                                     30.0 E
                          b
                                    radius 693                   c
         pt III

        point I: sin 6          =i      . =-
                                         b
                                         b
                                                     c sin 0
                                                     69.5 sin 22.5   = (69.5X.3825)
                                         b       =   26.65

               L   = 23.5 + 26.65 =                     50.15° N

                          cos   =   —
                                    a
                                    C
                                        ;a
                                         a
                                                 = c cos 6
                                                 = 69.5 cos 22.5 = (69.5X.9245)
                                         a       = 64.14
               X   = 64.14 - 30.00 =                     34.14 ° W

        point III: same calculation for a & b; they are the same ( triangle for pt III is upside down
                          from pt I )

          thus b          = 26.65
                      L   = 26.65 - 23.50 =                  3.15° S

                      a   = 64.14
                      X   = 64.14 - 30.00 =                  34.14 ° W
252 Maps of the Ancient Sea Kings
           point IV:

                                            23.5 N
   pt II
                       a                    30.0 E
                                                        b   = c sin 6
                                                        b   = 69.5 sin 45° = (69.5X.707)
                 b                 / Jo                 b   = 49.10
                                                        L   = 49.10 - 23.50 = 25.60 ° S
                                                        by geometry a= b = 49.10
                                                        X = 49.10 - 30.00 =   19.10 ° W
      pt IV

           point V:
                                            23.5 N
   pt II                                    30.00 E
                           a
                                     ei *               b   = c sin 0
                                                        b   = (69.5)(sin 67.5) = (69.5X.924)
                                     <b
                                                        b   = 64.30
                 b     O       / <£>
                                       '                L   = 64.30 - 23.50 = 40.80 ° S
                                                        a   = c( cos )6(
                                                        a = 69.5 cos 67.5) = (69.5X.382)
                                                        a = 26.55
                                                        X = 30.0 - 26.55 =      3.35° E
       pt V

    These calculations are more accurate than those of my last letter . Note some
small changes.
                               Pt               L

                               I            50.15° N            34.14 ° W
                               II           23.50 ° N           39.50° W
                               III           3.15° S            34.14 ° W
                               IV           25.60 ° S           19.10° W
                               V            40.80 ° S            3.35 ° E

     These figures, of course, had to be adjusted to take account of the Eratosthenian
error of 4 % per cent in the circumference of the earth . This was done by adding
4% per cent to latitudes from the North Pole and to longitudes from the meridian
of Alexandria .
                                                                            APPENDIX 253
For the De Canerio Map
   50.0 N
    5.5 W                                       by Pythagorean Theorem
                                                       a 2 + b2    = c2
b = 50.0
                                                       c   =   )a 2 -f b2
   -0.0                                                c = )50.02 + 35.52
b = 50.0°
                                                       c = ) 2500 + 1260.25

                                                       c = ) 3760.25

                                          30.0 E
                                                       c   = 61.305 =       61.3 degrees

            a = 30.0 - 5.5                00.0 N
            a = 35.5°
                    Spherical Trigonometry of the De Canerio Map*




From spherical trigonometry:

                  cos c   = cos a cos b    log cos a
                                           log cos b
                                                     = 9.80807 10
                                                     = 9.91069 - 10
                                                                      —
                                            log cos c = 58 26'40"
                                               (or   about 58.4) t




    * Calculation by E. A. Wixson .
    t An independent calculation by Dr. John M . Frankland, of the Bureau oi
Standards, gave a closely similar result of 58 ° 27'.
Geographical Tables

                                Table 1: Piri Re 'i* Map of 1513


                     Locality                 True Position        Piri Re' is Map   Errors

(a )   AFRICA

          1. Annobon Islands                      2.0 S             2.0 S             0.0
                                                  6.0 E             0.0               6.0 W

          2. Cavally River


          3. Cape Palmas                          4.0 N             5.0 N             1.0 N
                                                  8.0 W             2.5 W             5.5 E

          4. St. Paul River                       7.0 N             6.0 N             1.0 S
                                                 11.0 W             7.5 W             3.5 E

          5. Mono River                           7.5 N             6.0 N             1.5 S
                                                 12.0 W             9.0 W             3.0 E

          6. Freetown                             8.5 N             7.5 N             1.0 S
                                                 15.5 W            12.0 W             3.5 E

          7. Bijagos Islands                     11.0 N            10.0 N             1.0 S
                                                 16.0 W            15.0 W             1.0 E

          8. Gambia River                        13.5 N            13.0 N             0.5 S
                                                 16.5 W            16.0 W             0.5 E

          9. Dakar                               15.0 N            14.0 N             1.0 S
                                                 17.0 W            17.5 W             0.5 W

         10. Senegal River                       16.0 N            15.0 N             1.0 S
                                                 16.5 W            16.0 W             0.5 E

         11. Cape Blanc                          21.0 N            21.0 N             0.0
                                                 17.0 W            18.0 W             1.0 W

         12. Cape Juby                           28.0 N            25.5 N             2.5 S
                                                 13.0 W            15.0 W             2.0 W

         13. Sebu River                          34.3 N            32.0 N             2.3 S
                                                  9.0 W             8.0 W             1.0 E
                                                             GEOGRAPHICAL TABLES               255
                        Locality                 True Position          Piri Re' is Map     Errors

(b)   EUROPE

           .
         14 Gibraltar                               36.0 N              35.0 N               1.0 S
                                                     5.5 W               7.0 W               1.5 W

           .
         15 Guadalquivir River                      37.0 N              37.0 N               0.0
                                                     6.3 W               7.0 W               0.7 W

           .            .
         16 Cape St Vincent                         37.0 N              36.0 N               1.0 S
                                                     9.0 W              11.0 W               2.0 W

           .
         17 Tagus River                             38.5 N              38.0 N               0.0
                                                     9.0 W              11.0 W               2.0 W

           .
         18 Cape Finisterre                         43.0 N              43.0 N               0.0
                                                     9.0 W              12.0 W               3.0 W

           .
         19 Gironde River


           .
         20 Brest                                   48.0 N              48.0 N               0.0
                                                     5.0 W               8.0 W               3.0 W

(c) NORTH ATLANTIC          ISLANDS

           .
         21 Cape Verde Islands                      15-17 N               -
                                                                        14 19 N               0.0
                                                      -
                                                    22 25 W               -
                                                                        23 29 W               0.0

           .
         22 The Canary Islands                      27-29 N             26-28 N               1.0 S
                                                      -
                                                    13 17 W             14-20 W               1.0 W

           .
         23 Madeira Islands                         36.6 N              31.0 N                5.6 N
                                                    17.0 W              17.0 W                0.0

           .
         24 The Azores                              37-39 N             36-40 N               0.0
                                                    25-31 W               -
                                                                        25 32 W               0.0

(d)   THE CARIBBEAN ON GRID B

           The northward shifting of the geography of the main grid by 4.4 °, to agree with the line
                                                                                              .
      through Point III as the equator, pushed the geography of the Caribbean about 4° west This
      error is taken account of in the following table.

           .
         25 Cuba

                (a )   Gulf of Guacanayabo          20.5 N             18.0 N                 2.5 S
                                                    77.5 W             88.0 W     - 4.0       7.5 W

                (b)    Guantanamo Bay               20.0 N             18.0 N                 2.0 S
                                                    75.0 W             86.0 W     - 4.0       7.0 W

                (c)    Bahia de Nipe                21.0 N             21.5 N                 0.5 N
                                                    77.5 W             85.0 W     - 4.0       3.5 W
256      Maps of the Ancient Sea Kings
                         Locality                True Position    Piri Re' is Map   Errors

                  (d)   Bahia de la Gloria          22.0 N       22.0 N              0.0
                                                    77.5 W       88.0 W    - 4.0     6.5 W

                  (e) Camaguey      Mountains       21.0 N       20.0 N              1.0 S
                                                      -
                                                    77 79 W        -
                                                                 85 89 W   - 4.0     4.0 W

                  (f) Sierra Maestro Mountains      20.0 N       18.0 N              2.0 S
                                                      -
                                                    76 77 W      84-86 W   - 4.0     4.0 W

          .
        26 Andros Island                            23-25 N      26.0 N              2.0 N
                                                    76-77 W      92-96 W   - 4.0    12.0 W

          .
        27 San Salvador (Watling)                   24.0 N       26.5 N             2.5 N
                                                    74.5 W       84.5 W    - 4.0    6.0 W

          .
        28 Isle of Pines                            22.0 N       16.0 N              6.0 S
                                                    83.0 W       91.0 W    - 4.0     4.0 W

          .
        29 Jamaica                                  18.0 N       15-16 N             2.5 S
                                                    77.0 W       86.0 W    - 4.0     5.0 W

          .
        30 Hispaniola (Santo Domingo, Haiti)        18-20 N        -
                                                                 16 19 N             1.0 S
                                                    68-74 W      74-76 W - 4.0       0.0

          .
        31 Puerto Rico                              18-19 N      21.0 N              1.5 N
                                                    66-67 W      74.0 W    - 4.0     3.5 W

(e)   SOUTH AND CENTRAL AMERICAN COASTS ON GRID B

          .
        32 Rio Moroni ?                              6.0 N       11.0 N              5.0 N
                                                    54.0 W       59.0 W    - 4.0     1.0 W

          .
        33 Coranti|n River ?                         6.0 N       10.0 N              4.0 N
                                                    57.0 W       60.0 W    - 4.0     1.0 E

          .
        34 Essequibo River ?                         7.0 N       10.0 N              3.0 N
                                                    58.0 W       61.5 W     - 4.0    1.0 E

          .
        35 Orinoco River                             9-10 N      14.0 N              4.5 N
                                                    61-63 W      67.0 W     - 4.0    1.0 W

          .
        36 Gulf of Venezuela                           -
                                                    11 12 N      13.0 N              1.5 N
                                                    71.0 W       76.0 W     - 4.0    1.0 W

          . .
        37 Pt Gallinas                              12.5 N       14.5 N              2.0 N
                                                    72.5 W       77.5 W     - 4.0    1.0 W

          .
        38 Magdalena River ?                        11.0 N       12.5 N              1.5 N
                                                    75.0 W       79.5 W     - 4.0    0.5 W

          .
         39 Gulf of Uraba                            8.0 N       10.5 N              2.5 N
                                                    77.0 W       79.0 W     - 4.0    2.0 E

         40 Honduras (Cape Gracias a Dios)           15.0 N      13.0 N               2.0 S
                                                     83.0 W      86.0 W     - 4.0     1.0 E

              .
         41 Yucatdn                                 21.0 N       15.0 N              6.0 S
                                                    88.0 W       96.0 W     - 4.0    4.0 W
                                                          GEOGRAPHICAL TABLES 257
                    Locality                 True Position       Piri Re' is Map   Errors

(f)   SOUTH AND CENTRAL AMERICAN COASTS (on the main grid of the map and on the inset
      grid, Grid C)

           .
         42 Cape Frio                           23.0 S          23.0 S              0.0
                                                42.0 W          38.0 W              4.0 E

           .
         43 Salvador                            13.0 S          13.5 S              0.5 S
                                                39.0 W          38.0 W              1.0 E

           .
         44 San Francisco River                 11.5 S          10.5 S              1.0 N
                                                36.5 W          37.0 W              0.5 W

           .
         45 Recife (Pernambuco)                  8.0 S           7.0 S              1.0 N
                                                35.0 W          34.5 W              0.5 E

           .
         46 Cape Sao Rocque                      5.0 S           6.5 S              1.5 S
                                                36.0 W          36.0 W              0.0

           .
         47 Rio Parahyba                          3.0 S          4.0 S              1.0 S
                                                 42.0 W         40.0 W              2.0 E

           .
         48 Bahia Sao Marcos                      2.5 S          4.0 S              1.5 S
                                                 44.0 W         45.0 W              1.0 W

           .
         49 Serras de Gurupi, de Desordam,
              de Negro

           .                     .
         50 The Amazon (No 1) Par6 River          0.5 S          0.5 S              0.0
                                                 48.0 W         48.0 W              0.0

           .                     .
         51 The Amazon (No 2) Par6 River          0.5 S          2.0 N              2.5 N
                                                 48.0 W         50.0 W              2.0 W

           .                     .
         52 The Amazon (No 2) western             0.0            4.0 N               4.0 N
              mouth                              50.0 W         53.0 W               3.0 W

           .
         53 Island of Maraj6

         54. Essequibo   River                    7.0 N          5.0 N               2.0 S
                                                 58.5 W         60.0 W               1.5 W

           .
         55 Mouths of the Orinoco                 9-10 N         6.5-7.5 N           2.5 S
                                                   -
                                                 61 63 W        62.5 W               0.0

           .
         56 Peninsula of Paria                   10.5 N           -
                                                                 7 9N                2.5 S
                                                 62-63 W        61.0 W               1.5 E

(g)   CARIBBEAN ISLANDS ON THE MAIN GRID

           .
         57 Martinique                           14.5 N         14.5 N               0.0
                                                 61.0 W         59.0 W               2.0 E

           .
         58 Guadaloupe                           16.3 N         17.0 N               0.7 N
                                                 61.5 W         60.0 W               1.5 E
258        Maps of the Ancient Sea Kings
                       Locality                  True Position           Piri Re' is Map     Errors

            .
          59 Antigua                                 17.0 N             19.0 N                  2.0 N
                                                     62.0 W             59.0 W                  3.0 E

               .
          60 Leeward Islands                           -
                                                     17 18 N              -
                                                                       17 21 N                  0.0
                                                       -
                                                     61 63 W              -
                                                                       60 63 W                  0.0

               .
          61 Virgin Islands                          18.5 N            26-28 N              .
                                                                                            c 9.0 N
                                                     64.5 W               -
                                                                       62 65 W                  0.0

(h)   CENTRAL AMERICAN COAST

           Between the Peninsula of Paria and the Gulf of Venezuela there is a break in the map,
      and the coast between these points has been omitted, resulting in a loss of about 4%° of west
      longitude. This has been compensated for by adding 4%° to each finding of west longitude    .
               .
          62 Gulf of Venezuela                         -
                                                     11 12 N              -
                                                                       10 11 N                  0.0
                                                     71.0 W            65.0 W     +   4.5       1.5 E

               .
          63 Magdalena River                         11.0 N            10.0 N                   1.0 S
                                                     75.0 W            68.0 W     +   4.5       2.5 E

          64. Atrato River                            8.0 N             8.0 N                   0.0
                                                     77.0 W            73.0 W     +   4.5       0.5 W

               .
          65 Honduras (Cape Gracias a Dios)          15.0 N            17.0 N                   2.0 N
                                                     82.5 W            72.0 W     +   4.5       6.0 E

               .
          66 Yucatdn                                 21.0 N            24.0 N                   3.0 N
                                                     88.0 W            77.0 W     +   4.5       6.5 E

(i) THE LOWER EAST COAST OF SOUTH AMERICA AND SOME ATLANTIC ISLANDS (on                           the
    main grid of the map)

            Here a mistake of compilation has resulted in the omission of all of the coast between
                                  .
      Cape Frio and Bahia Blanca About 900 miles of coastline is missing, with a net loss of 16° of
                                                              .
      latitude going south, and 20 ° of longitude going west The table includes adjustment for these
           .
      errors

            .
          67 Bahia Blanca                            39.0 S            22.0 S     +16           1.0 N
                                                     62.0 W            40.0 W     +20           2.0 E

          68. Rio Colorado                           40.0 S            22.5 S     +16           1.5 N
                                                     62.0 W            41.0 W     +20           1.0 E

            .
          69 Gulf of San Mathias                     42.5 S            25.0 S     +16           1.5 N
                                                     64.0 W            42.5 W     + 20          1.5 E

               .
          70 Rio Negro (Argentina)                   41.OS             25.0 S     +16           0.0
                                                     63.0 W            43.0 W     +   20        0.0

            .
          71 Rio Chubua                              44.0 S            27.0 S     +16           1.0 N
                                                     65.0 W            47.5 W     +20           2.5 W
                                                             GEOGRAPHICAL TABLES                    259
                          Locality                 True Position           Piri Re' is Map      Errors

             .
          72 Gulf of San Gorge                        47.0 S              27.5 S     +16            3.5 N
                                                      66.0 W              45.0 W     +20            1.0 E

             .
          73 Bahia Grande                             50-52 S             30.0 S     +16            5.0 N
                                                      69.0 W              47.0 W     +20            2.0 E

             .
          74 Cape San Diego (near the Horn)           55.0 S              35.0 S     +16            4.0 N
                                                      65.0 W              46.5 W     +20            1.5 W

             .
          75 Falkland Islands                         52.0 S              30-32 S    +16            5.0 N
                                                      60.0 W              43-45 W    +20            4.0 W

           At this point there appears to be another break in the map, with the omission of Drake
                 .
       Passage This involves a further loss of about 9 ° of latitude. The total latitude adjustment now
       amounts to 25 °.
             .
           76 The South Shetlands                      61.0 S             33-34 S    +25            2.5 N
                                                       60.0 W             40-43 W    +20            0.0

             .
           77 South Georgia                                        .
                                                       Anomalous See below       .
( j)   ANTARCTICA

             .
           78 The Palmer Peninsula                     65.0 S             36.0 S     +25            4.0 N
                                                       60.0 W             40.0 W     +20            0.0

             .
           79 The Weddell Sea                            -
                                                       67 75 S            37.0 S     +25        .
                                                                                               c 8.0 N
                                                         -
                                                       20 60 W            30-40 W

             At this point the deficiency of west longitude is compensated for by a large error in the
       total longitude covered by the Weddell Sea. On the modern map this amounts to 40 °; on the
                                         .
       Piri Re'is Map only to about 10 ° We therefore now subtract 10 ° from the west longitude
       readings.

             . .
           80 Mt Ropke, Queen Maud Land                72.5 S             42.5 S     +25            5.0 N
                                                        4.0 W             15.0 W     - 10           1.0 W

             .
           81 The Regula Range                         72.5 S             42.5 S     +25            5.0 N
                                                        2.5 W             12.5 W     - 10           0.0

             .
           82 Muhlig-Hofmann Mountains                 71-73 S               -
                                                                          41 43 s    +
                                                                                    25              4.0 N


             .
           83 Penck Trough
                                                         —
                                                        1 6E

                                                       73.0 S
                                                                             -
                                                                           7 10 W - 10
                                                                          44.0 S     +25
                                                                                                    0.0

                                                                                                    4.0 N
                                                        2.5 W             12.0 W     - 10           0.0

             .
           84 Neumeyer Escarpment                      73.5 S             45.0 S     +25            3.5 N
                                                        2.0 W             12.0 W     -10            0.0

             .
           85 Drygalski Mountains                        -
                                                       71 73 S            40.0 S     +25            7.0 N
                                                         -
                                                        8 14 E             2.0 E     +10            0.0

             .
           86 Vorposten Peak                           71.5 S              42.5 S    +25            3.0 N
                                                       16.0 E               6.0 E    +10            0.0

             .
           87 Boreas, Passat Nunataks                  71.5 S              37-38 S   +
                                                                                     25             4.0 N
                                                        4.0 W                -
                                                                           11 14 W - 10             0.0
260       Maps of the Ancient Sea Kings
                     Locality                   True Position      Piri Re' is Map       Errors

(k)   SOUTH ATLANTIC ISLANDS (on the main grid of the map)

           .
         88 Tristan d'Acunha                         37.0 S       33.0 S                  4.0 N
                                                     12.5 W       12.5 W                  0.0

           .
         89 Gough Island                             40.3 S       35.5 S                  4.8 N
                                                     10.0 W        9.0 W                  1.0 E

           .
         77 South Georgia                            54.5 S       36.0 S                 18.5 N
                                                     37.0 W       37-38 W                 0.0

           .
         95 Fernando da Naronha                       4.0 S       10.0 S                  6.0 S
                                                     31.0 W       30.0 W                  1.0 E

         The latitude error suggests that the island was placed on the map with reference to
      Amazon No. 1, but on the scale of the main grid.

(I)   PACIFIC COAST OF SOUTH AMERICA

         90a, 90b. Coastal ranges of the Andes

           .
         91 Peninsula of Paracas

           .
         92 Valparaiso

(m)   NON-EXISTENT ISLANDS

           .
         93 Island over Mid-Atlantic Ridge

           .
         94 Island labeled Antillia by Piri Re'is
                             //     //




                       Table 2: The Oronteus Finaeus World Map of 1531

                                             Antarctica
                                                                  Oronteus
                                                     True          Finaeus
                 Geographical Localities            Position      Position           Errors

 (a) QUEEN      MAUD LAND

            .
           1 Cape Norvegia                          71.5 S       66.5 S                   5.0 N
                                                    12.0 W        6.0 W                   6.0 E

            .
           2 Regula Range                           72-73 S       68-69 S                 4.0 N
                                                    2-5 W          0-3 E             .
                                                                                     c    5.0 E

           3. Penck Trough                             -
                                                    71 74 S       66.5-69 S          .
                                                                                     c    3.0 N
                                                    3.0 W          4.0 E                  7.0 E

           4. Neumeyer Escarpment                   73.0 E        68-69 S                 4.0 N
                                                    0-4 W          0.5 E             .
                                                                                     c    4.0 E
                                                          GEOGRAPHICAL TABLES 261
                                                                 Oronteus
                                                True              Finaeus
               Geographical Localities         Position           Position       Errors

         5. Muhlig Hofmann and Wohlthat
                  -                              -
                                               71 73 S            -
                                                               70 71 S             0.0
             Mountains                          -
                                               0 15 E          10-15 E             0.0

          .
         6 Sor Rondanne and Belgica Mts    .   72.0 S          72-73 S             0.0
                                               22-33 E         20-30 E             0.0

          .
         7 Prince Harald Coast, Lutzow -       69-70 S         70.0 S              0.0
              Holm Bay, Shirase Glacier        35-40 E         35-37 E             0.0

         8. Queen Fabiola Mountains            76-77 S         73.0 S        .
                                                                             c     3.0 N
                                               35-36 E         30-40 E             0.0

(b)   ENDERBY LAND

          .
         9 Casey Bay (Lena Bay) or             67.0 S          70.0 S              3.0 N
             Amundsen Bay                      48-50 E         48.0 E              0.0

          .
        10 Nye Mountains, Sandercook           73.0 S           72-73 S            0.0
              Nunataks                         49.0 E           50.0 E             1.0 E

          .
        11 Edward VIII Bay (Kemp Coast)        66-67 S         69-70 S             3.0 S
                                               58-60 E         55.0 E              4.0 W

          .
        12 Schwartz Range, Rayner Peak,
             Dismal Mountains, Leckie          71-74 S            -
                                                               71 73 S             0.0
             Range, Knuckley Peaks, etc    .     -
                                               54 57 E         60-75 E            12.0 E

          .
        13 Amery Ice Shelf, MacKenzie-         73-78 S         67.0 S        .
                                                                             c     8.5 N
            Prydz Bays                         70-75 E         73.0 E              0.0

          .
        14 Prince Charles Mountains and        72-74 S         68-70 S       .
                                                                             c     4.0 N
              adjacent peaks                   60-69 E         70-75 E       .
                                                                             c     5.0 E


(c)   WILKES LAND

          .
        15 Philippi Glacier,                   67.0 S           66.0 S            1.0 N
             Posadowsky Bay                    88-89 E          77.0 E           11.5 W

          .
        16 Denman-Scott Glaciers                 -
                                               66 67 S          66.0 S            0.0
             (Shakleton Ice Shelf)             99-101 E         85.0 E           15.0 W

          .
        18 Vincennes Bay                       66-67 S          65.0 S            1.5 N
                                               109 E            105.0 E           4.0 W

          .
        19 Totten Glacier                      67.0 S           66.0 S            1.0 N
                                               115-117 E        112.0 E           4.0 W

          .
        20 Porpoise Bay                        67.0 S           67.0 S            0.0
                                               128-130 E        122.0 E           7.0 W
262      Maps of the Ancient Sea Kings
                                                               Oronteus
                                             True               Finaeus
               Geographical Localities      Position            Position            Errors

          .
        21 Merz Glacier                     68.0 S            70.0 S                 2.0 S
                                            144-145 E         140.0 E                4.5 W

          .
        22 McLean, Carroll Nunataks,
             Aurora Peak, Medigan           67-68 S           70-71 S                3.0 S
             Nunatak, etc.                  143-145 E         132-134 E             11.0 W

          .
        23 Pennell Glacier, Lauritzen Bay   69.0 S            70.0 S                 1.0 S
                                            157-158 E         150.0 E                7.5 W

(d)   VICTORIA LAND and THE ROSS SEA

          .
        24 Rennick Bay                      70.5 S            72.5 S                 2.0 S
                                            162.0 E           155.0 E                7.0 W

          .
        25 Arctic Institute Range           70-73 S           74-75 S                3.5 S
                                               -
                                            161 162 E         150-155 E              7.0 W

          .
        26 Newnes Iceshelf and Glacier      73.5 S            74.5 S                 1.0 S
                                            167.0 E           170.0 E                3.0 E

          .      .
        27 Ross I (Mount Erebus)            77.5 S            76.5 S                 1.0 S
                                            168.0 E           172.0 E                4.0 E

          .
        28 Ferrer Taylor Glacier              -
                                            77 78 S           77.0 S                 0.0
                                               -
                                            159 163 E         160-170 E              0.0

          .
        29 Boomerang Range and adjacent     77-78 S             -
                                                              77 79 S                0.0
             peaks (Escalade Peak, Portal   159-163 E         142-152 E             14.0 E
                .
             Mt , Mt. Harmsworth, etc.)

          .                       .
        30 Mountain group: Mt Christmas,    80-82 S           79-80 S                1.5 N
                .             .
             Mt Nares, Mt Albert Mark-      157-160 E         140-150 E         .
                                                                            c 13.5 W
             ham, Pyramid Mountains,
                .
            Mt Wharton, Mt. Field,
            Mt. Hamilton

          .
        31 Queen Alexandra Range            84-85 S           84-87 S                0.0
                                            160-165 E         145-155 E         .
                                                                            c 10.0 W

          .
        32 Queen Maud Range                 87.0 S            81-82 S                5.5 N
                                            140 W-180 E / W   140-160 E         . -
                                                                            c 20 40 E

          .
        33 Nimrod Glacier                   82.5 S            81.0 S                 1.5 S
                                               -
                                            157 163 E         160-175 E     c   .    0.0

          .
        34 Beardmore Glacier                84-85 S           82-84 S               0.0
                                            170.0 E           170 E-170 W   .
                                                                            c       0.0

          .
        36 Leverett Glacier                 85.5 S            81-82 S               4.0 N
                                            150.0 W           140-160 W     .
                                                                            c       0.0
                                                      GEOGRAPHICAL TABLES 263
                                                             Oronteus
                                            True              Finaeus
               Geographical Localities     Position           Position           Errors

          .
        37 Supporting Party Mountain,      85.3 S           80.0 S                5.3 N
                    .
             or Mt Gould                   150.0 W          160.0 W              10.0 W

          .
        38 Thiel and Horlich Mts.          86.0 S           83—85 S              3.0 N
                                           90-130 W         130-150 W    .
                                                                         c 30.0 W

          .
        39 Bay, unnamed, west coast        80-81 S          77.5 S               3.0 N
             of Ross Sea                   150.0 W          150-160 W    .
                                                                         c       0.0

          .
        40 Prestrude Inlet, Kiel Glacier   78.0 S           74.0 S               4.0 N
                                           157-159 W        160.0 W              2.0 W

          .
        42 Edward VII Peninsula            77-78 S            -
                                                            72 73 S              5.0 N
                                           155-158 W        158-165 W    c   .   4.0 W

          .
        43 Sulzberger Bay                  77.0 S           73.5 S               3.5 N
                                           146-154 W        150-155 W    .
                                                                         c       0.0

        44. Land now submerged ?

(e)   MARIE BYRD LAND

          .
        45 Edsel Ford Range                76-78 S          73-74 S               3.5 N
                                           142.0 W          135-143 W             0.0

          .
        46 Executive Committee Range       77.0 S           73.0 S                4.0 N
                                           125-130 W           -
                                                            130 135 W    c   .    5.0 W

           .
         47 Cape Dart, Wrigley Gulf,       75.0 S           70.5 S                4.5 N
              and Getz Ice Shelf           130.0 W          130.0 W               0.0

          .
        48 Cape Herlacher, Martin          74.0 S           72.0 S                2.0 N
               Peninsula                   114.0 W          108.0 W               6.0 E

          .
        49 Kohler Range and Crary          76-77 S          74-75 S               2.5 N
             Mountains                         -
                                           111 118 W        108-115 W             0.0

          .
        50 Canisteo Peninsula              74.0 S           74.0 S                0.0
                                           102.0 W          98.0 W                4.0 E

          .
        51 Hudson Mountains                  -
                                           74 75 S            -
                                                            72 74 S               1.0 N
                                           99.0 W           105-110 W    c   .    8.0 W

(f)   ELLSWORTH LAND

          .
        52 Jones Mountains                 73.5 S           74.0 S                0.5 S
                                           94.0 W *         100.0 W               6.0 W

          .
        53 Inlet in Ellsworth Land,          -
                                           73 80 ?S           -
                                                            72 74 S               0.0
              indicated to exist under     80-95 W          85-95 W               0.0
              the present ice cap
264      Maps of the Ancient Sea Kings
                                                                   Oronteus
                                                True                Finaeus
                 Geographical Localities       Position             Position         Errors

          .
        54 Base of the Antarctic (Palmer) Peninsula?

          .
        55 The Weddell Sea, shown almost connected with the Ross Sea?

          .
        56 Duplicated coastline of Ellsworth Land?

        57. Duplicated base of Antarctic Peninsula?

        58. Berkner Island in the Weddell Sea shown extending over the continental shelf   to    the
                north?


                Table 3: The Hadji Ahmed Map of 1559, Exclusive of the Antarctic

          Locality                               True Position   Turkish Map           Errors

(a)   POSITIONS CLOSE TO THE PRIME MERIDIAN

        Magellan Strait                                 54 S         49 S                  5.0 S
                                                     68-73 W      68-73 W                  0.0

        Cape Horn                                       55 S         51 S                  4.0 S
                                                        65 W         70 W                  5.0 W

        Amazon River                                     1S           1S                   0.0
                                                        SOW          50 W                  0.0

        Rio de la Plata                                 35 S         35 S                  0.0
                                                        55 W         51 W                  4.0 E

        Cape Frio                                      23.5 S        23 S                  5.0 N
                                                         43 W        43 W                  0.0

        Peninsula of Paria                             10.5 N        10 N                  0.5 S
                                                        62 W         70 W                  8.0 W

        Hudson River                                    41 N         51 N              10.0 N
                                                        72 W         72 W               0.0

        Gibraltar                                       35 N         31 N                  4.0 S
                                                          7W         10 W                  3.0 W

(b)   POSITIONS DISTANT FROM THE PRIME MERIDIAN

        Chile Coast                                  25-50 S      40-49 S              .
                                                                                      c 7.5 S
                                                        72 W         80 W                  8.0 W

        Haiti                                        19-20 N      19-20 N               0.0
                                                        70 W         80 W              10.0 W
                                                       GEOGRAPHICAL TABLES                265
          Locality                            True Position   Turkish Map            Errors

        Coast of Texas                              29 N           29 N               0.0
                                                    99 W          110 W              11.0 W

        Ceylon                                       6N             9N                3.0 N
                                                    80 E          110 E              30.0 E

        Aden                                        12 N           12 N               0.0
                                                    60 E           45 E              15.0 W

        Gulf of California                       23.5 N            30 N               6.5 N
                                              130-140 W           110 W              25.0 E



          Table 4: Mercator ' s World Map of 1569 ( Antarctic coast on a polar
                                   or circular projection )
                                                    True
                     Locality                      Position        Mercator              Errors

 .
 1 Cape Dart (Mt. Siple) (Marie Byrd Land)          73.5 S           63.0 S          10.0 N
                                                   121.0 W           95.0 W          26.0 E

2. Cape Herlacher (Marie Byrd Land)                 74.0 S           65.0 S          11 .O N
                                                   114.0 W           92.0 W          22.0 E

3. Amundsen Sea                                    72.0 S             -
                                                                   69 71 S               1.0 N
                                                   -
                                                 90 104 W            -
                                                                  90 100 W               0.0

4. Thurston Island (Eights Coast)                  72.0 S            70.0 S              2.0 N
       (Ellsworth    Land)                        88-93 W             -
                                                                    81 84 W          .
                                                                                    c 7.0 E

 5. Fletcher Islands (Bellingshausen Sea)         71-82 S           72-75 S              0.0
                                                  71-82 W           70-80 W              0.0

6. Alexander I Island                               72.0 S           72.5 S              0.5 S
                                                    67.0 W           58.0 W              9.0 E

7. Palmer ( Antarctic) Peninsula *                  70.0 S           72.0 S            1.5 S
                                                    60.0 W           47.0 W           13.0 E

  .
 8 Weddell Seat                                        -
                                                  72 73 S             -
                                                                    72 75 S              0.0
                                                  35-50 W             -
                                                                    35 40 W              0.0

 9. Cape Norvegia (Queen Maud Land)                 71.0 S           75.0 S              4.0 S
                                                    28.0 W           20.0 W              8.0 E

  .
10 Regula Range (Queen Maud Land)                   72.0 S           77.0 S              5.0 S
                                                     4.0 W            5.0 W              1.0 W

      * Truncated.
     t Longitudes of places west of the Weddell Sea may be off 10° because of an error in the
width of the Weddell Sea; the same error is found on the Piri Re'is Map.
266      Maps of the Ancient Sea Kings
                                                          True
                      Locality                           Position        Mercator          Errors

  .
11 Muhlig Hofmann Mts. (Queen Maud Land)
              -                                           72.0 S          77.0 S         5.0 S
                                                           3-8 E           2-7 E         0.0

  .
12 Prince Harold Coast                                    70.0 S           74.0 S       4.0 S
                                                         20-31 E         30-40 E       10.0 E

  .
13 Shirase Glacier (Prince Harold Coast)                   70.0 S         73.5 S           3.5 S
                                                         38-40 E          45.0 E           6.0 E

  .
14 Padda Island (Lutzow-Holm Bay)                         69.5 S          71.OS            1.5 S
                                                          35.0 E          42.0 E           7.0 E

  .
15 Prince Olaf Coast (Enderby Land)                        68.5 S         73.0 S        4.5 S
                                                         33-40 E         45-50 E       11.0 E



                                 Table 5: Mercator's World Map of 1538
                                                                       True          Mercator' s
                                 Identified Localities              Longitudes       Longitudes

(a)   ANTARCTICA

          .
         1 Antarctic (Palmer) Peninsula, truncated at 70° S.         60-70 W         74.0 W
          .
         2 Weddell Sea                                               25-55 W         26-42 W
          .
         3 Caird Coast                                               20-30 W         10-18 W
          .       .
         4 5 Princess Martha and Princess Astrid Coasts,
              Queen Maud Land                                        20 W-20 E         0.0
          .
         6 Prince Harold Coast                                       30-35 E        2 W-6 E
          .
         7 MacKenzie-Prydz Bays                                      70-80 E           -
                                                                                      38 46 E
          .
         8 Denman Glacier and Ice Tongue                             100.0 E          68.0 E
          .
         9 Vincennes Bay                                             110.0 E          78.0 E
          .
        10 Beardmore Glacier, Ross Sea                               170.0 E         142.0 E
          .
        11 Robert Scott Glacier, Ross Sea                            150.0 W         150.0 E
          .
        12 Amundsen Sea                                              110-120 W         -
                                                                                     162 170 W
          .
        13 Alexander Island                                          70-75 W          82.0 W

(b)   SOUTH AMERICA

        14. The Chile Coast                                          70-75 W         74.0 W
        15. Falklands? (as one large island)                          60.0 W         58.66 W
        16. Gulf of San Gorge, Argentina                             65-67 W         50.0 W
        17. Gulf of San Mathias, Argentina                           64-65 W         42.0 W
        18. Arica (Peru-Bolivia)                                      70.0 W         66.0 W
        19. Pt. Aguia                                                 81.0 W         74.0 W
        20. Gulf of Guayaquil (Ecuador)                               80.0 W         74.0 W
        21. Ensenada di Tumaco (Colombia)                             79.0 W         71.0 W

(c) NEW      ZEALAND

          .
        22 New Zealand: "Los roccos Insula"                          165-180 E      102-110 E
                                                               GEOGRAPHICAL TABLES 267
                                                                      True            Mercofor' j
                               Identified Localities                Longitudes        Longitudes
(d)   AFRICA

        23.    Cape of Good Hope                                     18.5 E           22.0 E
        24.     .
               St Helena Bay                                         18.0 E           21.0 E
        25.    Walvi Bay                                             15.0 E           12.0 E
        26.
                    *
               Laurence Marques Bay                                  33.0 E           36.0 E
        27.    Cape San Sebastian                                    35.0 E           42.0 E
        28.    Madagascar                                            45.0 E             -
                                                                                      46 50 E


                                  Table 6a: Dulcert Portolano of 1339
                                                       True            Dulcert
                              Locality                 Position       Portolano    Errors

           .
          1 Malin Head, Ireland                        55.2 N         56.5 N          1.3 N
                                                        7.0 W          7.0 W          0.0

          2. Galway, Ireland                           53.0 N         53.0 N          0.0
                                                        9.0 W          8.0 W          1.0 E

           .
          3 Cape Clear, Ireland                        51.5 N         50.5 N          1.0 S
                                                        9.0 W          8.0 W          1.0 E

          4. The Hebrides                               57-58.5 N     57-58 N         0.0
                                                          -
                                                         6 7W            -
                                                                       4 5W           2.0 E

           .
          5 Moray Firth, Scotland                      57.7 N         57.0 N          0.7 S
                                                           -
                                                        3.5 4 W        1.5 W      .
                                                                                  c 2.0 E

           .
          6 Solway Firth                               55.0 N         55.0 N          0.0
                                                        3-4 W          3.5 W      .
                                                                                  c 0.0

           .
         7 Lands End, England                          50.0 N         50.0 N          0.0
                                                        6.0 W          4.5 W          1.5 E

          8. Scilly Islands                            50.0 N         50.0 N          0.0
                                                        6.5 W           -
                                                                       5 6W           1.0 E

          9. The Wash                                  53.0 N         53.5 N          0.5 N
                                                        0.3 E          1.0 W          1.3 W

        10. Thames River                               51.3 N         51.5 N          0.2 N
                                                        0.5 E          0.5 W          1.0 W

          .
        11 Isle of Wight                               50.6 N         50.4 N          0.2 S
                                                        1.3 W          2.0 W          0.7 W

           .
         12 Calais, France                             50.7 N         50.4 N          0.3 S
                                                        2.0 E          0.0            2.0 W

        13. Brest                                      48.5 N         47.5 N          1.0 S
                                                        4.5 W          4.0 W          0.5 E
268   Maps of the Ancient Sea Kings
                                           True       Dulcert
                      Locality            Position   Portolano   Errors

        .
      14 Belle Isle                       47.2 N     46.2 N       1.0 S
                                           3.0 W      3.0 W       0.0

        .
      15 The Loire River                  47.2 N     46.2 N       1.0 S
                                           2.0 W      2.5 W       0.5 W

        .
      16 La Gironde River                 45.5 N     44.0 N       1.5 S
                                           1.0 W      2.0 W       1.0 W

        .
      17 Cape Finisterre, Spain           43.0 N     42.5 N       0.5 S
                                           9.0 W      8.5 W       0.5 W

        .
      18 Tagus River, Portugal            39.0 N     37.0 N       2.0 S
                                           9.0 W      7.0 W       2.0 E

        .
      19 Guadalquivir River               37.0 N     35.5 N      1.5 S
                                           6.3 W      7.0 W      0.7 W

        .
      20 Gibraltar                        36.0 N     34.9 N      1.1 S
                                           5.5 W      5.0 W      0.5 E

        .
      21 Sebu River                       35.0 N     32.0 N       3.0 S
                                           6.0 W      7.5 W       1.5 W

        .
      22 Madeira Islands                  32.5 N     30.0 N      2.5 S
                                          16-17 W    13.0 W      3.5 E

        .
      23 Cape Juby                        27.0 N     27.0 N      0.0
                                          13.0 W     11.5 W      2.0 E

        .
      24 Fuerteventura (Canary Islands)   28.0 N     30.0 N       2.0 N
                                          14.0 W     13.0 W       1.0 E

        .
      25 Cartagena, Spain                 37.5 N     36.5 N      1.0 S
                                           1.0 W      0.5 W      0.5 E

        .
      26 Majorca (Mallorca)               39.9 N     39.0 N      0.9 S
                                           3.0 E      3.0 E      0.0

        .
      27 Marseilles                       42.0 N     44.0 N       2.0 N
                                           5.0 E      6.0 E       1.0 E

        .
      28 Cape Corse, Corsica              43.5 N     43.5 N      0.0
                                           9.3 E      9.5 E      0.2 E

        .
      29 Cagliari, Sardinia               39.0 N     37.0 N      2.0 S
                                           9.0 E      9.5 E      0.5 E

        .
      30 Cape Bon, Tunisia                37.0 N     36.0 N      1.0 S
                                          11.0 E     11.5 E      0.5 E

        .
      31 Cape Passero, Sicily             36.5 N     35.5 N      1.0 S
                                          15.0 E     15.0 E      0.0
                                                               GEOGRAPHICAL TABLES 269
                                                    True              Dulcert
                            Locality                Position         Portolano        Errors

          .
        32 Bengazi, Libya                           32.0 N           30.0 N            2.0 S
                                                    20.0 E           20.0 E            0.0

          .
        33 Trieste, Italy                           46.0 N           47.5 N            1.5 N
                                                    14.0 E           14.5 E            0.5 E

          .
        34 Corfu                                    40.2 N           40.0 N            0.2 S
                                                    20.0 E           20.0 E            0.0

        35. Kalamai, Peloponnesus                   37.0 N           37.0 N            0.0
                                                    22.0 E           22.5 E            0.5 E

        36. The Bosphorus                           41.0 N           44.0 N            3.0 N
                                                    29.0 E           28.5 E            0.5 W

          .
        37 Danube River                             45.0 N           50.0 N            5.0 N
                                                    34.5 E           29.5 E            5.0 W

          .
        38 Sevastopol                               44.5 N           49.3 N            4.8 N
                                                    33.5 E           33.5 E            0.0

        39. Rostov                                  47.3 N            53.0 N           5.7 N
                                                    39.5 E            38.0 E           1.5 W

          .
        40 Don River bend                           49.0 N           52.5 N            3.5 N
                                                    44.0 E           44.5 E            0.5 E

          .
        41 Stalingrad (Volga River)                 49.0 N           55.0 N            6.0 N
                                                    44.5 E            47.0 E           2.5 E

          .
        42 Batum                                    41.5 N           45.0 N            3.5 N
                                                    41.5 E           41.5 E            0.0

        43. Cape Andreas (Cyprus)                   36.0 N           37.0 N            1.0 N
                                                    34.5 E           35.5 E            1.0 E

        44. Crete, South Coast                      37.5 N           35.0 N            2.5 S
                                                    24.5-26 E        24-26 E           0.0

        45. Rhodes                                  36.0 N           37.0 N            1.0 N
                                                    28.0 E           28.0 E            0.0

          .
        46 Antalya, Turkey                          37.0 N           37.5 N            0.5 N
                                                    30.7 E           31.5 E            0.8 E

        47. Alexandria                              31.0 N           Correct by assumption
                                                    30.0 E           32.0 E          2.0 E

        48. Aswan                                   24.0 N           24.0 N            0.0
                                                    33.0 E           34.0 E            1.0 E

          .
        49 Ras Muhammad (Sinai)                     27.5 N           27.5 N            0.0
                                                    34.0 E           35.5 E            1.5 E

          .
        50 Coast of India? *

       * Appears to resemble the coast of India from about 25 ° North Latitude, 62 ° East Longitude,
to   about 22 ° North Latitude, 70° East Longitude.
270    Maps of the Ancient Sea Kings
                           Analysis of the Dulcert Portolano
    If we compare a group of the northernmost Atlantic points on this chart,
with respect to latitude, we End errors as follows :

                                             Table 6 b
                                Geographical Localities     Lot . Error

                      1.        Malin Head , Ireland          1.3 N
                      2.        Galway, Ireland               0.0
                      3.        Cape Clear, Ireland           1.0 S
                      4.        The Hebrides                  0.0
                      5.        Moray Firth, Scotland         0.0
                      6.        Solway Firth                  0.0
                      7.        Lands End                     0.0
                      8.        Scilly Islands                0.0
                      9.        The Wash                      0.5 N
                     10.        The Thames                    0.2 N
                     11.        Isle of Wight                 0.2 S

     We note that Ireland seems to be represented on too large a scale, but that
otherwise latitudes are essentially correct . They are based on the parallel of Alex-
andria , our base line of latitude, and are therefore correct with respect to the
latitude of that city . Latitude errors of the more southern points on the map do
not indicate any considerable error in the length of the degree of latitude.
      With respect to longitude, the location of a group of western localities dis-
tributed from northern Ireland to Cape Juby shows evidence of a remarkable
knowledge of their comparative longitudes:
                                             Table 6c
                                 Geographical Localities   Long . Errors

                      1.        Malin Head, Ireland           0.0
                      2.        Galway, Ireland               1.0 E
                      3.        Cape Clear, Ireland           1.0 E
                      4.        The Hebrides                  2.0 E
                      7.        Lands End                     1.5 E
                      8, 9  .   The Wash                      1.3 W
                     10.        Thames                        1.0 W
                     11.        Isle of Wight                 0.7 W
                     12.        Calais                        2.0 W
                     13.        Brest                         0.5 E
                     14.        Belle Isle                    0.0
                     15.        Loire River                   0.5 W
                     16.        La Gironde                    1.0 W
                     17.         Cape Finisterre              0.5 W
                     18.         Tagus River                  2.0 E
                     19.         Guadalquivir River           0.7 W
                     20.         Gibraltar                    0.5 E
                     21 .        Sebu River                   1.5 W
                     22.         Madeira Islands              3.5 E
                     23.         Cape Juby                    2.0 E
                                                            GEOGRAPHICAL TABLES 271
     There is an indication here of an error in the scale of England , points on the
west being too far east, and points on the east being too far west .
     A comparison of the longitudes found for the localities on the eastern part
of the map reveals the same order of accuracy :
                                             Table 6d
                                  Geographical Localities      Long . Errors

                        34.       Corfu                           0.0
                        35.       Kalamai                         0.5 E
                        36.       The Bosphorus                   0.5 W
                        37.       Danube River                    5.0 W
                        38.       Sevastopol                      0.0
                        39.       Rostov                          1.5 W
                        40.       Don River Bend                  0.5 E
                        41.       Stalingrad                      2.5 E
                        42.       Batum                           0.0
                        45.       Rhodes                          0.0
                        46.       Antalya                         0.8 E
                        48.       Aswan                           1.0 E

     It seems that these places are in remarkably correct longitudinal accuracy
with respect to each other. But , it may be noted , they are also in equally correct
relationship to the points on the Atlantic coast ; in other words, the mapmaker
achieved high accuracy in finding the longitudes of places distributed over an
east-west distance of some 3,000 miles.

     Table 7: De Canerio Map of 1502 ( grid drawn by spherical trigonometry )

                Geographical                   True          De Canerio
                  Localities                  Position         Map             Errors

        .
       1 Cape of Good Hope                     35.5 S         37.0 S           1.5 S
                                               18.5 E         14.0 E           4.5 W

       2. Gt. Paternoster Pt  .                33.0 S         35.5 S           2.5 S
                                               18.0 E         14.0 E           4.0 W

       3. Walvis Bay, Pelican Point            23.0 S         22.5 S           0.5 N
                                               15.0 E         10.0 E           5.0 W

       4. Congo River                           6.0 S         13.0 S           7.0 S
                                               12.2 E         14.0 E           1.8 E

       5. Cap Lopez                               1.0 S        5.0 S           4.0 S
                                                  9.0 E       10.0 E           1.0 E

       6. Sao Tom 6 (island )                     0.0          4.0 S           4.0 S
                                                  6.0 E        8.0 E           2.0 E

       7. Niger Delta                           4.0 N          1.0 N           3.0 S
                                                6.0 E          8.0 E           2.0 E
272 Maps of the Ancient Sea Kings
                Geographical         True      De Canerio
                   Localities       Position      Map       Errors

      .
     8 Cape Three Point
                                *    5.0 N        3.5 N      1.5 S
                                     2.0 W        5.0 W      3.0 W

      .
     9 Cap Palmas                    4.5 N        4.0 N      0.5 S
                                     8.0 W        9.0 W      1.0 W

      .
    10 Freetown                      8.0 N      10.0 N       2.0 N
                                    13.5 W      17.5 W       4.0 W

      .
    11 Dakar                        15.0 N      17.0 N       2.0 N
                                    17.0 W      20.0 W       3.0 W

      .
    12 Cap Blanc                    21.0 N      24.0 N       3.0 N
                                    17.0 W      20.0 W       3.0 W

      .
    13 CapYubi                      28.0 N      28.0 N       0.0
                                    13.0 W      15.5 W       2.5 W

      .
    14 Gibraltar                    36.0 N      34.5 N       1.5 S
                                     5.5 W       5.5 W       0.0

      .
    15 Cap Bon                      37.0 N      34.0 N       3.0 S
                                    11.0 E      11.0 E       0.0

      .
    16 Bengazi                      32.0 N      28.0 N       4.0 S
                                    20.0 E      19.5 E       0.5 W

      .
    17 Alexandria                   31.0 N      26.5 N       4.5 S
                                    30.0 E      30.0 E      (assumption)


      .
    18 Cyprus                       35.0 N      32.0 N       3.0 S
                                    32-34 E     32-34 E      0.0

      .
    19 Crete                        35.0 N      32.0 N       3.0 S
                                    24-26 E     25.0 E       0.0

      .
    20 Lesbos (Aegean Sea)          39.0 N      36.0 N       3.0 S
                                    26.0 E      26.5 E       0.5 E

      .
    21 Bosphorus                    41.ON       39.0 N       2.0 S
                                    29.0 E      29.5 E       0.5 E

      .
    22 Sevastopol (Crimea)          44.5 N      41.0 N       3.5 S
                                    34.5 E      35.0 E       0.5 E

      .
    23 Batum (Caucasus)             42.0 N      38.0 N       4.0 S
                                    42.0 E      43.0 E       1.0 E

      .
    24 Sicily                       36-37 N      34.0 N      2.5 S
                                    13-15 E      15.0 E      0.0

      .
    25 Sardinia                     39-41 N      35-38 N     3.0 S
                                      -
                                     8 10 E       9-10 E     0.0
                                                             GEOGRAPHICAL TABLES 273
                   Geographical                    True       De Canerio
                         Localities               Position       Map               Errors

        .            .
      26 Cape St Vincent                          37.0 N        36.0 N             LOS
                                                  11.0 W        10.0 W             1.0 E

        .
      27 Cap Finisterre                           43.0 N        42.0 N             1.0 S
                                                   9.0 W         9.0 W             0.0

     28. Brest                                    48.0 N        47.0 N             1.0 S
                                                   5.0 W         4.0 W             1.0 E

        .
      29 Cape Clear (Ireland)                     52.0 N        49.5 N             2.5 S
                                                  10.0 W         8.0 W             2.0 E

      30. Londonderry                             55.0 N        54.5 N             0.5 S
                                                   7.5 W         6.5 W             1.0 E

        .
      31 Denmark (northern coast)                 50-53 N       56.0 N             4.5 N
                                                   8-10 E        7.5 E             2.5 W

      32. Gulf of Riga                            57.5 N        52.5 N             5.0 S
                                                    -
                                                  23 24 E       25.0 E             1.5 E

      33. Saarma Island (Gulf of Riga)            57.5 N        55.0 N             2.5 S
                                                  22.5 E        24.0 E             1.5 E


AFRICAN EAST COAST

      34. Lauren$o Marques                        25.0 S        27.0 S             2.0 S
                                                  33.0 E        35.0 E             2.0 E

      35. Beira *                                 20.0 S        15.0 S              5.0 N
                                                  35.0 E        45.0 E             10.0 E

      36. Capo Guardafui * (Ras Assir)            12.0 N         1.0 N             11.0 S
                                                  51.0 E        69.0 E             18.0 E

      37. Al Hadd, Oman *                         22.5 N        19.0 N              3.5 S
                                                  60.0 E        79.5 E             19.5 E


                             Analysis of De Canerio Map , with Grid Based on
                                          Spherical Trigonometry

     The map is composed of three main sections. Its most accurate part, based on the ancient
portolan tradition, consists of the Atlantic coasts of Africa and Europe, and the coasts of the
Mediterranean and Black Seas. An inaccurate eastern section, based on Ptolemy, consists of the
                                                                               .
east coast of Africa (north of Lauren;o Marques), the Red Sea, and Arabia The third section is
                                              .
an inaccurate map of part of the Baltic Disregarding the unscientific parts of the map, and
considering only the parts apparently related to the ancient portolan tradition, the errors are:



     * Ptolemaic    part    of the map .
274 Maps of the Ancient Sea Kings
                                                       Latitude       Longitude
          .
         a West Coast of Africa

                 1. Cape of Good Hope                   1.5 S           4.5 W
                 2 . Gt. Paternoster Pt.                2.5 S           4.0 W
                 3.                        .
                      Walvis Bay, Pelican Pt            0.5 N           5.0 W
                 4 . Congo River                        7.0 S           1.8 E
                 5 . Cap Lopez                          4.0 S           1.0 E
                 6 . Sao Tom6                           4.0 S           2.0 E
                 7 . Niger Delta                        3.0 S           2.0 E
                 8.  Cape Three Points                  1.5 S           3.0 W
                 9 . Cap Palmas                         0.5 S           1.0 W
                10 . Freetown                           2.0 N           4.0 W
                11 . Dakar                              2.0 N           3.0 W
                12 . Cap Blanc                          3.0 N           3.0 W
                13 . Cap Yubi                           0.0             2.5 W


         b. Atlantic Coast of Europe

                14 . Gibraltar                          1.5 S           0.0
                26 . Cap St. Vincent                    1.0 S           1.0 E
                27.   Cap Finisterre                    1.0 S           0.0
                28.   Brest                             1.0 S           0.0
                29 . Cape  Clear                        2.5 S           2.0 E
                30.   Londonderry                       0.5 S           1.0 E


          .
         c Mediterranean and Black Seas, west to east

                14.   Gibraltar                         1.5 S           0.0
                15.   Cap Bon                           3.0 S           0.0
                16.   Bengazi                           4.0 S           0.5 W
                17.   Alexandria                        4.5 S           0.0 (assumption)
                18.   Cyprus                            3.0 S           0.0
                19.   Crete                             3.0 S           0.0
                20.   Lesbos                            3.0 S           0.5 E
                21 . Bosphorus                          2.0 S           0.5 E
                22.   Sevastopol                        3.5 S           0.5 E
                23.   Batum                             4.0 S           1.0 E
                24.   Sicily                            2.5 S           0.0
                25 . Sardinia                           3.0 S           0.0




                               Table 8: The Venetian Map of 1484

     Shown are the positions of identified geographical points, as found on a grid worked out
empirically. The length of the degree of latitude was found between Villa Cisneros, at 24° North,
and the equator as found by comparison with the geography. The length of the degree of longi-
tude was found from the longitude distance between Dakar and Cape Lopez. These degrees
turned out to be practically the same. For the grid, longitude was set with reference to the longi-
tude of Dakar, and latitude with reference to the equator as found. The map was reoriented to
True North from its former magnetic orientation.
                                       GEOGRAPHICAL TABLES        275
                             True      Venetian
      Localities            Position     Map            Errors

 1. Villa Cisneros          24.0 N      24.0 N    by assumption
                            16.0 W      16.0 W    0.0

 2. Cape Blanc              21.0 N      21.5 N    0.5 N
                            17.0 W      17.0 W    0.0

 3. Cape Minlk              19.3 N      20.0 N    0.7 N
                            16.0 W      16.0 W    0.0

 4. Senegal River           16.0 N      16.0 N    0.0
                            17.0 W      17.0 W    0.0

 5. Dakar                   14.0 N      15.5 N    1.5 N
                            17.5 W      17.5 W    by assumption

 6. Gambia River            12.5 N      14.5 N    2.0 N
                            17.0 W      17.0 W    0.0

 7. Sao Nicolau, Cape       16.5 N      18.5 N    2.0 N
      Verde Islands         24.0 W      24.0 W    0.0

 8. Sao Tiago, Cape Verde   16.0 N      17.0 N    1.0 N
      Islands               24.0 W      23.0 W    1.0 E

 9. Cape Roxe               12.5 N      13.0 N    0.5 N
                            17.0 W      17.0 W    0.0

10. Bijagos Islands         11.0 N      12.0 N    1.0 N
                            16.0 W      16.0 W    0.0

11. Freetown                 8.5 N       8.5 N    0.0
                            13.0 W      13.5 W    0.5 W

12. Cape Palmas              4.5 N       5.0 N    0.5 N
                             7.5 W       7.5 W    0.0

13. Cape Three Points         5.0 N      5.0 N    0.0
                              2.0 W      2.5 W    0.5 W

14. Volta River Estuary      6.0 N       6.0 N    0.0
                             0.5 E       0.5 E    0.0

15. Lagos                    6.5 N       7.0 N    0.5 N
                             3.5 E       4.0 E    0.5 E

16. Niger River Delta        4.5 N       5.0 N    0.5 N
                             6-7 E       6-7 E    0.0

17. Fernando Po Island       3.5 N       3.5 N    0.0
                             9.0 E       9.5 E    0.5 E
276      Maps of the Ancient Sea Kings
                                                   True                Venetian
                 Localities                       Position               Map             Errors

           .
         18 Sao Tom6                                  0.0                0.0         by assumption
                                                      7.0 E              6.0 E       1.0 W

            .
         19 A non-existent island, possibly a duplicate of Sao Tom6.


           .
         20 Cape Lopez                                1.0 S              1.0 S       0.0
                                                      9.0 E              9.0 E       by assumption

           .
         21 Congo Estuary                          6.0 S                9.0 S        3.0 S
                                                  12.0 E               12.0 E        0.0

           .
         22 Benguela                              12.5 S               16.0 S       3.5 S
                                                  13.0 E               11.0 E       2.0 W


                                    Analysis of Errors in Venetian Map

     This table suggests that the mapmaker achieved astonishing accuracy in relative latitudes
and longitudes for most of the coast covered by the map. If the anomalous southern extension
of the coast be disregarded, the only serious distortion is in the latitudes of Dakar, the Gambia
River, and the Cape Verde Islands      .
                               Localities                     Latitude            Longitude

                     1   . Villa  Cisneros                         *               0.0
                     2.       .
                             C Blanc                          0.5 N                0.0
                     3.      Cape Minik                       0.7 N                0.0
                     4   . Senegal River                      0.0                  0.0
                     5   . Dakar                              1.5 N
                     6. Gambia River                          2.0 N               0.0
                     7. Sao Nicolau                           2.0 N               0.0
                         .
                     8 Sao Tiago                              1.0 N               1.0 E
                         .
                     9 Cape Roxe                              0.5 N               0.0
                         .
                    10 Bijagos Isl.                           1.0 N               0.0
                         .
                    11 Freetown                               0.0                 0.5 W
                         .
                    12 Cape Palmas                            0.5 N               0.0
                    13. Cape Three Points                     0.0                 0.5 W
                    14. Volta River                           0.0                 0.0
                         .
                    15 Lagos                                  0.5 N               0.0
                         .
                    16 Niger River                            0.5 N               0.0
                         .
                    17 Fernando Po I         .                0.0                 0.5 E
                         .
                    18 Sao Tom6                                                   1.0 W
                         .
                    21 Congo Estuary                          3.0 St              0.0 Et
                         .
                    22 Benguela                               3.5 St              2.0 Wt




      * By assumption.
      t Anomalous. Recent additions         to map?
                                                    GEOGRAPHICAL TABLES            277
                         Table 9: Reinel Map of the Indian Ocean

                                                  True       Portuguese
                 Localities                      Location       Map       Errors

 1. Rocks of St. Paul                             0.0          0.0         0.0
                                                 29.0 W       33.0 W       4.0 W

 2. Ascension Island                              8.0 S       16.0 S       8.0 S
                                                 14.5 W       15.0 W       0.5 W

 3. Sao Tom6                                      0.0          0.0         0.0
                                                  0.0          7.0 W       7.0 W

 4. Tristan d'Achuna                             37.0 S       40.0 S       3.0 S
                                                 12.5 W        8- 13 W     0.0

 5. The Congo River                               6.0 S        6.0 S       0.0
                                                 12.0 E        8.0 E       4.0 W

 6. Cape Town                                    34.5 S       35.0 S       0.5 S
                                                 18.5 E       15.0 E       3.5 W

 7. Cape St. Marie, Madagascar                   25.5 S       26.0 S       0.5 S
                                                 45.0 E       45.0 E       0.0

 8. Dar es Salaam (Tanganyika )                   7.0 S        9.0 S       2.0 S
                                                 39.5 E       40.0 E       0.5 E

 9. Zanzibar


10. Comore Islands                               11-13 S      10- 16 S    0.0
                                                 43-45 E      41-46 E     0.0

11. Cape St. Andr6 (Madagascar)                  16.0 S       17.0 S      1.0 S
                                                 44.5 E       44.5 E      0.0

12. Cape d'Ambre                                12.0 S        12.0 S      0.0
                                                49.5 E        53.0 E      3.5 E

13. Cape Guardafui (Ras Assir )                 12.0 N        12.0 N      0.0
                                                51.0 E        57.0 E      6.0 E

14. Seychelles and Amirante Islands              4-7 S         3-5 S      0.0
                                                53-56 E       55-59 E     2.0 E

15. Al Hadd ( Arabia )                           27.5 N       22.0 N       5.5 S
                                                 60.0 E       70.0 E      10.0 E

16. Reunion Island                               21.0 S       21-25 S      0.0
                                                 55.5 E       72-74 E     17.0 E

17. Mauritius                                    20.0 S       23-24 S      3.5 S
                                                 57.0 E       78.0 E      21.0 E
278 Maps of the Ancient Sea Kings
                                                      True        Portuguese
                       Localities                    Location        Map        Errors

       .
     18 Mouth of Indus R. (no delta shown)           24.0 N        23.0 N           1.0 S
                                                     68.0 E        81.0 E          13.0 E

       .
     19 Laccadive Islands                            10-13 N        8-13 N          0.0
                                                     72-74 E       78-82 E          6.0 E

       .
     20 Maidive Islands                                 -
                                                      1 6N        4 N-5 S           0.0
                                                     73-74 E       80-85 E         10.0 E

       .
     21 Ceylon                                        6-8 N         7-10 N          2.0 N
                                                     80-82 E       89-90 E          9.0 E

       .
     23 Cape Leeuwin, Australia                      34.5 S        17.0 S          17.5 N
                                                    115.0 E       104.0 E          11.0 W

     24. Northwest Cape, Australia                   22.0 S         1.0 S          21.0 N
                                                    114.0 E       106.0 E           8.0 W

     25. Caroline Islands (Central: Ulul, Truk)       7-10 N      5 N-5 S      .
                                                                               c 8.0 N
                                                    147-150 E     133-140 E    .
                                                                               c 10.0 W




                           Table 10a: The Chinese Map of 1137 A.D.


                        Locality                  True Position    1137 Map        Errors

a.   THE NORTHWEST QUADRANT

             .
           18 Junction of the Tatung and               36.4 N        37.0 N        0.6 N
                Sining Rivers                         103.0 E       103.3 E        0.3 E

             .              .
           15 Bend of the R Hwang near                 38.5 N        37.0 N        1.5 S
                Ningsia                               107.2 E       107.5 E        0.3 E

             .             .
           16 Junction of R Hwang and                  38.0 N        38.0 N        0.0
                R. Tsingshui                          106.0 E       105.5 E        0.5 W

             .             .
           17 Junction of R Hwang and                  35.5 N        35.3 N        0.2 S
                  .
                R Fen                                 110.5 E       110.5 E        0.0

             .                      .
           19 Eastward turn of R Hwang at              34.5 N        34.5 N        0.0
                Tall                                  110.0 E       110.5 E        0.5 E

             .             .
           20 Junction of R King and R. Wei            34.4 N        35.0 N        0.6 N
                (Siking Province)                     109.0 E       109.0 E        0.0

             .             .
           28 Bend in the R Tao                        34.5 N        35.0 N        0.5 N
                                                      104.0 E       103.0 E        1.0 W

             .
           47 Junction of the R. Hwang and             36.0 N        36.0 N        0.0
                the R. Tao                            103.0 E       103.0 E        0.0
                                                 GEOGRAPHICAL TABLES          279
                      Locality            True Position   1137 Map   Errors

b. THE NORTHEAST QUADRANT

       .
      1 Penglai                               37.7 N       37.7 N    0.0
                                             120.6 E      119.5 E    1.1 W

      2. Chenshan Tow (tip of Shantung        37.4 N       37.7 N    0.3 N
            Peninsula)                       122.5 E      122.0 E    0.5 W

       .
     11 Lake (Tunga) on former course         36.0 N      35-36 N    0.0
                      .
          of the R Hwang                     116.0 E      116.0 E    0.0

       .
     13 Southward turn of the Hwang            40.0 N      40.0 N    0.0
          at Tokoto (Suiyuan P.)              111.2 E     111.6 E    0.4 E

       .                  .
     22 Junction of R Hwang and                35.0 N      35.2 N    0.2 N
          R. Chin                             113.3 E     113.3 E    0.0

       .
     26 Source of the R Tzeya .                37.0 N      36.6 N    0.4 S
                                              113.2 E     113.3 E    0.1 E

       .
     29 Island in Lake Tai Hu                  30.7 N      31.0 N    0.3 N
                                              120.5 E     120.3 E    0.2 W

       .
     42 Mouth of the R. Yangtze                31.5 N      32.0 N    0.5 N
                                              122.0 E     121.0 E    1.0 W

       .
     43 Lake Hungtze Hu                        33.2 N       32.0 N   1.2 S
                                              118.5 E      118.0 E   0.5 W

       .
     44 Taku, former mouth of the              37.7 N       37.8 N   0.1 N
          R. Hwang (1852 1938)        -       118.8 E      117.5 E   1.3 W

.
c SOUTHWEST QUADRANT

       .                  .
      8 Junction of R Kwei and R. Yu           23.5 N       23.3 N   0.2 S
          at Kwei Ping                        110.0 E      113.0 E   3.0 E

       .
     21 Chungking, at junction of              29.3 N       29.3 N   0.0
          R. Yangtze and R. (Fow)             106.0 E      106.5 E   0.5 E

       .
     23 Junction of the R. Yangtze and         30.0 N       29.5 N   0.5 S
                  .
          the R Wu (Kweichow Province)        107.5 E      106.5 E   1.0 W

       .
     24 Westward bend of the R. Wu             28.0 N       26.7 N   1.3 S
                                              106.2 E      107.5 E   1.3 E

       .
     27 Junction of the R. Changti and         27.9 N       27.1 N   0.8 S
                  .
          the R Chu                           110.1 E      111.9 E   1.8 E

       .                          .
     35 Junction of the R Yangtze and          29.7 N       27.5 N   2.2 S
          R. Min near Ipin                    104.5 E      104.5 E   0.0

        .
     36 Chengtu on the R Min      .            30.5 N       28.5 N   2.0 S
                                              104.0 E      104.5 E   0.5 E

        .
      25 Junction of the R. Yangtze and        26.5 N       27.7 N   1.2 N
           the R. Yalung                      101.7 E      103.2 E   1.5 E

        .
     50 Source of R. Tzu                       26.5 N       25.3 N   1.2 S
                                              110.5 E      112.2 E   1.7 E
280    Maps of the Ancient Sea Kings
                     Locality                    True Position       1137 Map            Errors

.
d SOUTHEAST QUADRANT

        9. Lake Tung Ting Hu                          29.0 N         28-29 N             0.0
                                                       -
                                                    112 113 E      113.5-114.5 E         1.5 E
         .
      10 Junction of R. Yangtze and                   30.5 N           30.7 N            0.2 N
              .
           R Han at Hankow                           114.0 E         115.0 E             1.0 E

        4. Mouth of R. Fushun                         30.4 N          29.7 N             0.7 S
                                                     121.0 E         121.0 E             0.0

         .
        6 Mouth of the R. Kwei                        22.0 N          22.6 N             0.6 N
                                                     113.0 E         115.5 E             2.5 E

         .                .
       39 Mouth of the R Wu (Chekiang                 23.0 N          25.7 N             2.7 N
            Province)                                121.0 E         122.5 E             1.5 E

         .
       46 Lake Pohang Hu                              29.0 N          30.0 N             1.0 N
                                                     116.5 E         117.5 E             1.0 E

         .
       49 Kanhsien, Kiang Prov.                       25.8 N          26.7 N             0.9 N
                                                     115.0 E         116.5 E             1.5 E


Table 10b: Northernmost and Southernmost Latitude Errors in Chinese Map of 1137 A.D               .
      The averages of these errors of the northernmost and southernmost positions, about 0.4 ° of
latitude on the north (some northernly and some southernly), and a little more than one degree
on the south, about equally distributed northward and southward, suggest that we have approxi     -
mately the right length for the degree of latitude.
                                                                                Errors
             NORTHERNMOST POSITIONS: NORTH OF 35 TH PARALLEL
                      .
                    18 Junction of the R. Tatung and the R. Sining              0.6 N
                      .
                    15 Bend of the R. Hwang near Ningsia                        1.5 S
                      .
                    16 Junction of R. Hwang and R. Tsingshui                    0.0
                      .
                    17 Junction of R. Hwang and R. Fen                          0.2 S
                      .
                    47 Junction of R. Hwang and R. Tao                          0.0
                      .
                     1 Penglai                                                  0.0
                      .
                     2 Chenchan Tow                                             0.3 N
                      .
                    11 Lake Tunga                                               0.0
                      .
                    13 Southward turn of R. Hwang                               0.0
                      .
                    22 Junction of R. Hwang and R. Chin                         0.2 N
                      .            .
                    26 Source of R Tzeya                                        0.4 S
                      .
                    44 Taku, former mouth of the Hwang                          0.1 N

             SOUTHERNMOST POSITIONS: SOUTH OF 28TH PARALLEL
                     8. Junction of R. Kwei and R. Yu                           0.2 S
                    25. Junction of the R. Yangtze and R. Yalung                1.0 N
                    50. Source of the R. Tzu                                    1.2 S
                    24. Westward bend of R. Wu                                  1.3 S
                    27. Junction of R. Yangtze and the R. Chu                   0.8 S
                     6. Mouth of River Si                                       0.6 N
                    39. Mouth of R. Wu (Chekiang Prov.)                         2.5 N
                    49. Kanhsien, Kiang Prov.                                   0.9 N
                                                           GEOGRAPHICAL TABLES                 281

Table 10c: Longitude Errors on Easternmost and Westernmost Positions on Chinese Map
                                    of 1137 A .D.

     These longitude positions suggest that we have approximately a correct length for the degree
of longitude and, therefore, that the lengths of the degrees of latitude and longitude differ,
according to the Mercator Projection, although we have not computed the projection mathematically.
                                                                           Errors
                   POSITIONS IN SOUTH, 104TH MERIDIAN OR FARTHER WEST

                           18. Junction of R. Tatung and R. Sining         0.3 E
                           28. Bend in R. Tao                              1.0 W
                           47. Junction of R. Hwang and R. Tao             0.0
                           35. Junction of the Yangzte and R. Min          0.0
                           36. Chengtu                                     0.5 E
                           25. Junction of the Yangtze and R. Yalung       1.5 E

                   POSITIONS ON 116TH MERIDIAN OR FARTHER EAST

                            1. Penglai                                     1.1 W
                            2. Chenshan Tow                                0.5 W
                           11. Lake Tunga                                  0.0
                           29. Island in Lake Tai Hu                       0.2 W
                            4. Mouth of R. Fushun                          0.0
                           39. Mouth of R. Wu (Chekiang)                   1.5 E
                           46. Lake Pohang Hu                              1.0 E

                     Longitude errors on west:                         on east:

                                0.3 E                                    1.1 W
                                1.0 W                                    0.5 W
                                0.0                                      0.0
                                0.0                                      0.2 W
                                0.5 E                                    0.0
                                1.5 E                                    1.5 E
                                                                         1.0 E


                  Table 11 a: The Zeno Map of the North ( polar projection) *
                                    Locality                  Latitude             Longitude

              WEST COAST OF GREENLAND                                     Errors
                      .
                     1 Cape Farewell                            .
                                                            (Ref Point)     (Ref . Point)
                                                            Assumed correct for Latitude
                                                                   and Longitude
                     2. Nanortalik                             0.1 S              3.0 E
                     3. Julianehaab                            1.0 N              1.5 W
                     4. Kebberline Bugt
                     5. Godthaab                               0.0                   4.0 E
                     6. Kangamiut                              0.0                   3.0 E
                     7. Disco Island                           1.0 S                 8.0 E
                     8. Karrats Fjord                          0.5 N                13.0 E
                     9. Cape Atholl                            3.5 S                25.0 E

     * Errors according to polar projection with straight meridians, constructed from the geography.
282    Maps of the Ancient Sea Kings
                                      Locality                    Latitude              Longitude

           EAST COAST OF GREENLAND                                             Errors

                  10. Tingmiamiut                                      0.0                      0.5 W
                  11. Dannebrogs                                       1.5 S                    1.0 W
                  12. Cape Dan
                  13. Cape Gustav Holm                                 0.5 S                    2.5 W
                  14. Gunnbiorn's Fjord                                0.5 N                    2.5 E
                  15. Cape Brewster                                    0.0                      3.0 W
                  16. Ymirs, Geographical Society
                         and Traill Islands
                  17. Kong Oscar's Fjord                               0.5 N                 0.0
                  18. Hold with Hope Pen.                              1.0 S                 9.0 E
                  19. Germania Land                                    3.0 S                20.0 E

           ICELAND

                  20.      Keflavik (as an island)                     0.5 S                    7.0 W
                  21   .   Vik                                         0.5 N                    8.0 W
                  22.      Seydisfjordur                               0.5 N                    7.0 W
                  23   .   Raufarhofn                                  3.0 N                    4.0 W

           NORWAY, DENMARK, GERMANY, SHETLANDS, FAROES, SCOTLAND

                  31   . Cape Lindesnes                            (correct  by assumption)
                  32   . Oslo Fjord                                    2.0 N           1.5 W
                  33.      Copenhagen                                  0.5 S           0.5 E
                  34.      Elbe River                                  2.0 S           0.0
                  35   .   Weser River                                 0.5 S           1.0 W
                  36   .   Shetland Islands                            0.0          c 6.0 W .
                  37.      The Faroes                                  0.0          c. 6.0 W
                  38.      Scotland (north tip)                        3.5 S            .
                                                                                   c 10.0 W



                Table 11 b: The Zeno Map of the North ( portolan projection) *

                               Locality              Latitude      Longitude

         WEST COAST OF GREENLAND                              Errors

                   .
                  1 Cape Farewell                     0.0                0.0 (assumption: base line
                                                                              of latitude)
                  2. Julianehaab                      0.0                2.0 E
                  3.   Sarmiligarssak Fiord           1.0 N              2.0 E
                  4.   Godthaab                       1.5 S              3.0 E
                  5. Disko Bay                        2.0 S              3.0 E
                  6. Melville Bay                     2.0 S             14.0 E
                  7. Cape Atholl                      1.5 S             22.0 E



     * Errors according to the 3rd Grid, on the portolan projection, with two norths, based on the
meridian of Alexandria, as found by the 2nd Grid.
                                                   GEOGRAPHICAL TABLES 283
                       Locality       Latitude        Longitude

 EAST COAST OF GREENLAND

         8. Sermilik Fjord             3.0 N           5.0 W
         9. Scoresby Sound             5.0 N          11.0 W

 NORWAY, DENMARK, GERMANY, ETC.

        10.    North Cope?             5.5 S?         15.0 W?
        11 .   Serjo                   2.5 S           9.0 W
        12.    Trondheim Fjord         1.0 N          14.0 W
        13.    Cope Lindesnes          0.0            10.0 W
        14.    Alborg (Denmark)        0.5 S          10.5 W
        15.    Elbe River (Germany)    4.0 S          16.0 W




                  Table 12: Andrea Benincata Portolano of 1508

                                            True                  Benincasa
                 Localities                Position                 Map       Errors

 1. Cape Yubi                                    28.0 N             27.0 N    1.0 S
                                                 13.0 W             15.0 W    2.0 W

 2. Cape Guir                                    30.5 N             30.5 N    0.0
                                                 10.0 W             10.0 W    0.0

 3. Mojador                                      31.5 N             32.0 N    0.5 N
                                                 10.0 W             10.0 W    0.0

 4. Mazagan (Oum er Rbia River)                  33.5 N             34.0 N    0.5 N
                                                  8.5 W              6.5 W    2.0 W

 5. Gibraltar                                    36.5 N             36.0 N    0.5 S
                                                  5.5 W              6.0 W    0.5 W

 6. Guadalquivir                                 37.0 N             37.0 N    0.0
                                                  6.5 W              6.5 W    0.0

7. Cap St. Vincent                               37.5 N             37.5 N    0.0
                                                  9.0 W              9.0 W    0.0

 8. Lisbon                                       38.5 N             39.5 N    1.0 N
                                                  9.5 W              8.5 W    1.0 E

 9. Cap Finisterre                               43.0 N             44.5 N    1.5 N
                                                  9.5 W              9.0 W    0.5 E

10. Cape de Penas                                43.5 N             45.0 N    1.5 N
                                                  6.0 W              6.0 W    0.0
284   Maps of the Ancient Sea Kings
                                                      True             Benincasa
                      Localities                     Position            Mop            Errors

        .
      11 Brest                                      48.5 N               51.0 N          2.5 N
                                                     5.0 W                5.0 W          0.0

        .
      12 Cherbourg                                   49.5 N              52.0 N          2.5 N
                                                      1.5 W               2.5 W          1.0 W

        .
      13 Calais                                      51.0 N              53.5 N          2.5 N
                                                      2.0 E               2.0 E          0.0

        .
      14 Lands End                                   50.0 N              53.0 N          3.0 N
                                                      5.5 W               5.5 W          0.0

        .
      15 Cape Clear, Ireland                         51.5 N              54.0 N          2.5 N
                                                      9.5 W               9.0 W          0.5 E

      16. Malin Head, Ireland                        55.0 N              59.0 N          4.0 N
                                                      7.5 W               7.5 W          0.0

        .
      17 Firth of Forth                              56.0 N              57.5 N          1.5 N
                                                      3.0 W               1.0 W          2.0 E

        .
      18 Kinnard's Head                              57.5 N              61.0 N          3.5 N
                                                      2.0 W               1.5 W          0.5 E

      19. The Rhine                                  52.0 N              54.0 N          2.0 N
                                                      4.0 E               2.5 E          1.5 W

        .
      20 The Elbe                                    54.0 N              56.0 N          2.0 N
                                                      9.0 E               2.0 E          7.0 W

        .
      21 Erz Gebirge (Mts )  .                     50-51 N             56-58 N           5.0 N
                                                   12-16 E             13-15 E           0.0

        .
      22 Swedish Coast (south coast)               c. 58.0 N             63.0 N          5.0 N
                                                    5-10 E             2 W-3 E           6.0 W

      24. The Wash (England)                         53.0 N              56.0 N          3.0 N
                                                      0.0                 1.0 W          1.0 W

        .
      25 The Danube runs an entirely fictitious course from the Alps to the Black Sea, only the
         terminal points being correct; it may be a medieval addition to the source map.

        .
      26 The Alps are drawn in the medieval tradition, and probably were added by the
         modern geographer (as also the mountains in Farica )   .
THE MEDITERRANEAN AND BLACK SEA

        .
      27 River Moulouya                              35.0 N              35.0 N          0.0
                                                      2.5 W               2.5 W          0.0

        .
      28 Cape Bon                                    37.0 N              37.5 N          0.5 N
                                                     11.0 E              10.0 E          1.0 W
                                                     GEOGRAPHICAL TABLES 285
                                                   True               Benincasa
                      Localities                  Position              Map         Errors


       .
     29 lie Djerba                                34.0 N               35.0 N       1.0 N
                                                  11.0 E               11.0 E       0.0

       .
     30 Cape Misurata                             32.5 N               32.0 N       0.5 S
                                                  15.3 E               15.0 E       0.3 W

       .
     31 Bengazi                                  32.0 N                31.5 N       0.5 S
                                                 20.0 E                19.0 E       1.0 W

     32. Alexandria                               31.0 N               32.0 N       1.0 N
                                                  30.0 E               31.0 E       1.0 E

       .
     33 Cyprus                               34.5-35.5 N            37-38 N         2.5 N
                                             32.5-34.5 E          32-34.5 E         0.0

       .
     34 Crete (southern coast)                    35.0 N             36.0 N         1.0 N
                                                23-27 E           23-26.5 E         1.0 W

     35. The Bosphorus                            41.0 N               45.0 N       4.0 N
                                                  29.0 E               28.5 E       0.5 W

     36. Yalta                                    44.5 N               50.0 N       5.5 N
                                                  34.0 E               33.0 E       1.0 W

     37. Batum                                    41.5 N               46.5 N       5.0 N
                                                  41.5 E               42.0 E       0.5 E

CENTRAL MEDITERRANEAN (NORTH COAST)

     38. Trieste                                  46.0 N               49.0 N       3.0 N
                                                  14.0 E               13.0 E       1.0 W

     39. Marseilles                               43.0 N               45.0 N       3.0 N
                                                   5.0 E                5.0 E       0.0

       .                                                                       .
     40 The Red Sea is shown without the Gulf of Aqaba or the Gulf of Suez Latitude 28 ° N
        (northern end) and Longitude 35-40° E. Correct.

                   Table 13: The Map of lehudi Ibn Ben Zara of Alexandria

                                                  True                 Zara
                      Locality                   Position              Map           Errors

           .
       1 Cape Yubi                                28.0 N          .
                                                                 c 28.0 N            0.0
                                                  13.0 W          .
                                                                 c 14.0 W            1.0 W

       2. Cape Guir                               30.5 N              31.5 N         1.0 N
                                                  10.0 W              10.0 W         0.0

       3. Majador                                 31.5 N              32.5 N         1.0 N
                                                  10.0 W               9.0 W         1.0 E
286   Maps of the Ancient Sea Kings
                                           True      Zara
                  Locality                Position   Map      Errors

       4. Mazagan (Oum er Rbia River)      33.5 N    34.0 N   0.5 N
                                            8.5 W     7.0 W   1.5 E

       5. Gibraltar                        36.5 N    35.5 N   1.0 S
                                            5.5 W     4.5 W   1.0 E

       6. Guadalquivir                     37.0 N    37.0 N   0.0
                                            6.5 W     5.0 W   1.5 E

                  .
       7. Cape St Vincent                  37.5 N    37.5 N   0.0
                                            9.0 W     7.5 W   1.5 E

       8. Tagus River (Lisbon)             38.5 N    39.5 N   1.0 N
                                            9.5 W     7.0 W   2.5 E

       9. Oporto (Douro River)             41.0 N    41.5 N   0.5 N
                                            8.5 W     6.0 W   2.5 E

        .
      10 Cap Finisterre                    43.0 N    44.0 N   1.0 N
                                            9.5 W     7.0 W   2.5 E

        .
      11 Cape de Penas                     43.5 N    45.0 N   1.5 N
                                            6.0 W     4.0 W   2.0 E

      12. Cape Machichaco                  43.5 N    44.0 N   0.5 N
                                            3.0 W     1.5 W   1.5 E

        .
      13 Arcachon, France                  44.5 N    45.0 N   0.5 N
                                            1.0 W     0.0     1.0 E

      14. Gironde River                    45.5 N    46.0 N   0.5 N
                                            1.0 W     0.0     1.0 E

        .
      15 Loire River                       47.0 N    48.5 N   1.5 N
                                            3.0 W     0.5 W   2.5 E

        .
      16 Isle d'Ouessant (off Pointe de    48.5 N    50.0 N   1.5 N
              .
            St Mathieu) (Brest)             5.0 W     3.0 W   2.0 E

      17. Cherbourg                        49.5 N    51.5 N   2.0 N
                                            1.5 W     0.0     1.5 E

        .
      18 Calais                            51.0 N    52.0 N   1.0 N
                                            2.0 E     2.5 E   0.5 E

      19. Isle of Wight, England           50.5 N    52.5 N   2.0 N
                                            1.0 W     0.5 E   1.5 E

        .
      20 Lands End                         50.0 N    52.5 N    2.5 N
                                            5.5 W     2.5 W    3.0 E

        .
      21 Scilly Islands
                                            GEOGRAPHICAL TABLES 287
                                         True         Zara
                  Locality              Position      Map                   Errors

       . .
     22 St Bride's Bay                   52.0 N      54.5 N                 2.5 N
                                          5.0 W       2.0 W                 3.0 E

       .
     23 Cape Clear, Ireland             51.5 N       53.0 N                 1.5 N
                                         9.5 W        7.0 W                 2.5 E

       .
     24 Carnsore Point                  52.3 N       54.0 N                 1.7 N
                                         6.5 W        4.0 W                 2.5 E

       .
     25 The Rhine                       52.0 N       52.5 N                 0.5 N
                                         4.0 E        4.0 E                 0.0

       .
     26 The Elbe River                  54.0 N       55.0 N                 1.0 N
                                         9.0 E        5.0 E                 4.0 W

       .
     27 Erz Gebirge (Mts.)             50-51 N     53-56 N              .
                                                                       c 2.0 N
                                       12-16 E     13-16 E                  0.0

       .
     28 The Alps *                     44-48 N     46-50 N                  2.0 N
                                        6-16 E       -
                                                    6 16 E                  0.0


THE MEDITERRANEAN

       .
     29 Cape Tres Forcas, Morocco        35.5 N      35.0 N                 0.5 S
                                          3.0 W       2.0 W                 1.0 E

       .
     30 River Moulouya


       .
     31 Cape Bon                         37.0 N      36.0 N                 1.0 S
                                         11.0 E      10.5 E                 0.5 W

       .
     32 lies Kerkennah


       .
     33 lie Djerba                      34.0 N       33.0 N                 1.0 S
                                        11.0 E       10.5 E                 0.5 W

       .
     34 Cape Misurata                   32.5 N       31.0 N                 1.5 S
                                        15.3 E       15.0 E                 0.3 W

       .
     35 Bengazi                         32.0 N       30.0 N                 2.0 S
                                        20.0 E       19.0 E                 1.0 W

     36. Ras et Tin                     32.5 N       31.0 N                 1.5 S
                                        23.0 E       22.5 E                 0.5 W

       .
     37 Alexandria                      31.0 N      29.0 N                2.0 S
                                        30.0 E      correct   by assumption

       .
     38 Cyprus                      34.5-35.5 N    33-34 N                  1.5 S
                                    32.5-34.5 E      -
                                                   32 34 E                  0.0
288   Maps of the Ancient Sea Kings
                                                   True                  Zara
                     Locality                     Position               Map             Errors

      39. The Bosphorus                             41.0 N              41.0 N           0.0
                                                    29.0 E              28.5 E           0.5 W

      40. Yalta                                     44.5 N              46.0 N           1.5 N
                                                    34.0 E              34.5 E           0.5 E

      41. Dolzhanskaya (Sea of Azov)                46.0 N              48.0 N           2.0 N
                                                    38.0 E              38.0 E           0.0

THE CENTRAL MEDITERRANEAN

      42. Kythera (Cythera) Island                  36.3 N              35.0 N           1.3 S
            (s. of Peloponnesus)                    23.0 E              22.5 E           0.5 W

      43. Trieste                                   46.0 N              47.5 N           1.5 N
                                                    14.0 E              15.0 E           1.0 E

      44 . Genoa                                    44.3 N              44.5 N           0.2 N
                                                     9.0 E               9.0 E           0.0

      45. Sicily, northern coast                    38.0 N               37.0 N          1.0 S
                                              12.5-15.5 E            12.5-15 E           0.0

      46. The Rhone River                           43.5 N              44.5 N           1.0 N
                                                     5.0 E               5.0 E           0.0

      47. Mallorca                              39.5-40 N               39.5 N           0.0
                                                     3.0 E               3.0 E           0.0



                    Table 14: The Map of Ibn Ben Zara ( Spanish section)


                                              True            Zara
                      Locality               Position         Map               Errors

             1. Tarifa                        36.0 N         35.8 N          0.2 S
                                               5.5 W          6.4 W          0.9 W

             2. La Linea                      36.2 N         35.8 N          0.4 S
                                               5.3 W          6.0 W          0.7 W

             3. Malaga                        36.7 N         36.2 N          0.5 S
                                               4.3 W          5.0 W          0.7 W

             4. Motril                        36.7 N         36.1 N          0.6 S
                                               3.5 W          3.7 W          0.3 E

            5. Almerfa                        36.8 N         36.3 N          0.5 S
                                               2.5 W          2.2 W          0.3 E
                                     GEOGRAPHICAL TABLES 289
                           True          Zara
           Locality       Position       Map      Errors

 6. Cape of Gata           36.7 N       36.1 N   0.6 S
                            2.2 W        2.0 W   0.2 E

 7. Cape of Palos          37.7 N       36.9 N   0.8 S
                            0.7 W        0.0     0.7 E

 8. Alicante               38.2 N       37.5 N   0.7 S
                            0.5 W        0.3 E   0.8 E

 9. Cape of Nao?           38.7 N       38.2 N   0.5 S
                            0.2 E        1.2 E   1.0 E

10. Valencia               39.5 N       39.0 N   0.5 S
                            0.2 W        0.8 E   1.0 E

12. Cape of Tortosa        40.7 N       40.3 N   0.4 S
                            0.2 E        2.3 E   2.1 E

13. Cape Trafalgar         36.2 N       36.0 N   0.2 S
                            6.0 W        6.7 W   0.7 W

14. C6 diz                 36.5 N       36.2 N   0.3 S
                            6.2 W        6.7 W   0.5 W

15. Guadalquiver Delta     36.7 N       36.7 N   0.0
                            6.2 W        6.7 W   0.5 W

16. Huelva                 37.2 N       37.2 N   0.0
                            7.0 W        7.5 W   0.5 W

17. Faro                   37.0 N       36.8 N   0.2 S
                            8.0 W        8.7 W   0.7 W

18. Cape of Sao Vicente   37.0 N        37.0 N   0.0
                           9.0 W         9.7 W   0.7 W

19. Cape Sines             38.0 N       38.0 N   0.0
                            8.7 W        9.0 W   0.3 W
20. Cape Espichel          38.5 N       38.6 N   0.1 N
                            9.2 W        9.2 W   0.0
21. Lisbon                38.7 N        38.8 N   0.1 N
                           9.2 W         9.2 W   0.0
22. Cape Carvoeiro        39.5 N        39.7 N   0.2 N
                           9.5 W         9.3 W   0.2 E
23. Farilhoes Is.         39.5 N        39.7 N   0.2 N
                           9.7 W         9.6 W   0.1 E
24. Cape Mondego          40.2 N        40.2 N   0.0
                           9.0 W         8.9 W   0.1 E
290     Maps of the Ancient Sea Kings
                                                   True             Zero
                      Locality                    Position          Map               Errors

                .
             25 Oporto                             41.2 N           41.0 N            0.2 S
                                                    8.7 W            8.2 W            0.5 E

             26. Vigo                              42.2 N           42.0 N            0.2 S
                                                    8.7 W            8.6 W            0.1 E

                .
             27 Cap Finisterre                     42.7 N           43.0 N            0.3 N
                                                    9.2 W            8.9 W            0.3 E

             28. La Coruna                         43.5 N           43.2 N            0.3 S
                                                    8.3 W            7.8 W            0.5 E

             29. Cape Ortegal                      43.7 N           43.7 N            0.0
                                                    7.7 W            7.4 W            0.3 E

                .
             30 Cape of Penas                      43.7 N           43.5 N            0.2 S
                                                    6.0 W            5.3 W            0.7 E

                .
             31 Santander                          43.5 N           42.9 N            0.6 S
                                                    3.7 W            3.7 W            0.0

                .
             32 Cape Machichaco                    43.5 N           43.0 N            0.5 S
                                                    2.7 W            2.3 W            0.4 E

                .
             33 San Sebastian                      43.2 N           42.8 N            0.4 S
                                                    2.7 W            1.3 W            1.4 E

                .
             34 Biarritz                           43.5 N           42.9 N            0.6 S
                                                    1.5 W            1.0 W            0.5 E


                           Analysis of Errors in the Ben Zara Map of Spain

     This suggests that a slight error in the length of the degree of longitude may have produced
errors in the longitudes of places across Spain amounting to about 20 miles, while a smaller error
in the length of the degree of latitude may have accounted for latitude errors averaging about
six miles.
                                                         Latitude            Longitude

                    (a) East Coast                      0.5 S *               0.2 E
                    (b) West Coast                      0.0                   0.1 E
                    (c) Northern Coast                  0.4 S                 0.4 E
                    (d) Southern Coast                  0.3 St                0.0

                           Error in Long. Distance, East and West coasts: 0.3 *
                           Error in Lot. Distance, North and South coasts: 0.1 °


      * Two localities anomalous, not averaged,
      t One locality anomalous, not averaged.
                                                     GEOGRAPHICAL TABLES            291


                      Table 15: Alternative Grid for the East Coast of
                              South America (Piri Re 'is Map )


                                           True            Alternative
         Locality                         Position            Grid         Errors
 1 . The Amazon                           00.0              00.0         Correct by
     (Para River )                        48.0 W            48.0 W       Assumption

 2. Bahia de Sao Marcos                    2.0 S             3.0 S         1.0 S
                                          44.0 W            44.0 W         0.0

 3. Parnaiba                               3.0 S             3.0 S         0.0
                                          42.0 W             4.0 W         1.0 E

 4. Fortaleza                              3.5 S             3.0 S         0.5 N
                                          38.5 W            37.5 S         1.0 E

 5. C. de Sao Roque                        5.0 S             2.5 S         2.5 N
                                          35.5 W            36.0 W         0.5 W

 6. Recife                                 8.0 S             4.5 S         3.5 N
                                          35.0 W            34.5 W         0.5 E

 7. Rio Sao Francisco                     10.5 S             7.5 S         3.0 N
                                          36.5 W            36.5 W         0.0

  8. Salvador                             13.0 S            10.0 S         3.0 N
                                          38.5 W            38.0 W         0.5 E

  9-11. Ponta de Baleia                    17.6 S            16.0 S        1.6 N
                                           39.0 W            39.0 W        0.0

 12. C. de Sao Tom6 (and                   22.0 S            19.0 S        3.0 N
     Rio Paraiba )                         41.0 W            40.0 W        1.0 E

 13. C. Frio                               23.0 S            22.0 S        1.0 N
                                           42.0 W            41.0 W        1.0 E

14a. Rio de Janeiro                        23.0 S            23.0 S      Correct by
                                                                         Assumption
                                           43.0 W            44.0 W        1.0 W

14b. Bahia de llha Grande                  23.0 S            24.0 S        1.0 S
                                           44.5 W            45.0 W        0.5 W
           This list includes not only works referred to in the text, but a selection
      of the relevant literature ( with no attempt at comprehensiveness ). It is hoped
      that it may be helpful at least as a starting point for those wishing to pursue
      further studies.

 .
 1 "A Columbus Controversy" (Piri Re'is                                    .            . "The British Isles in
                                                                         11 Andrews, M C.
     Map), Illustrated London News,                                            the Nautical Charts of the 14th
     February 27, 1932                   .                                     and 15 th Centuries," Geograph-
  .                      .
 2 Afet Inan, Dr The Oldest Map of                                             ical Journal, LXVIII (1926), 474-
      America, Drawn by Piri Re' is                                  .         481.
     Translated by Dr Leman Yolac.   .                                   12.   —  . "The Study and Classification
     Ankara: The National Library,                                             of Medieval Mappae Mundi,"
     1954    .                                                                Archeologia, LXXXV (1926), 61       -
  .
 3 Afrique [ Physical map of Africa ]                                .        76.
     (Sheets 1 and 3: Northwest Africa
     and West Africa to the Gold
                                                                         13.      . "Scotland in the Portolan
                                                                              Charts," Scottish Geographical
     Coast.) Paris: Institut G6 ograph-                                       Magazine, XLII (1926), 129 153, -
     ique Nationale, 1940-1941                           .                    193-213.
  .                  .
 4 Ainalov, D. V The Hellenistic Origins
                                                                           .
                                                                         14 Anthiaume, l'Abb6 A. Cartes ma        -
     of Byzantine Art. Translated from
     the Russian by E and S. Sobolo- .                                        rines, Constructions navales Voy.
                                                                              ages de d 6 couvertes chez les Nor -
                                                                                                                  -
     vitch. New Brunswick, N.J : Rut-                    .                                        -
                                                                              mandes, 1500 1650 Paris: Du .       -
     gers University Press, 1961                         .                    mont, 1916  .
  .                      .
 5 Akgura, Yusuf Piri Re' is Haritasi
                                                                           .                  .
                                                                         15 Ashe, Geoffrey Land to the West .
     hakkinda izahname "Turk Tarihi          .                                 New York: The Viking Press, 1962.
     Arastirma Kurumu yayinlarindan,"
             .
     No. 1 Istanbul, 1935                        .                         .              .
                                                                         16 Asimov, Isaac Asimov' s Biographical
 6.       . "Turkish Interest in America                                       Encyclopedia of Science and Tech   -
     in 1513: Piri Re'is' Chart of the                                         nology .   Garden    City,   N.Y.:
     Atlantic," Illustrated London News,                                      Doubleday, 1964.
     July 23, 1932           .                                             .
                                                                         17 Atlas of Mountain Glaciers of the
  .
 7 Amalgia, Roberto, ed See Monu-            .                                 Northern Hemisphere. (Technical
     menta Cartographica Vaticana                                .             Report     EP 92.)
                                                                                              -    Headquarters,
  .
 8 American Encyclopedia of History ,                                          Quartermaster Research and En      -
         .                       . .
      ed Ridpath, J C , et al Vol. I                 .               .         gineering Command, U.S. Army,
     Philadelphia: Encyclopedia Pub-                                                          . ..
                                                                               Natick, Mass , n d
      lishing Company, 1919.                                               .                          .
                                                                         18 Atlas Over Sverige (Utgiven av
  .
 9 American Oxford Atlas New York:               .                             Svenska Sallskapet For Anthropo-
     Oxford University Press, 1951                           .                 logi och Geografi.) Loose sheets.
  .                              .
10 Andrews, E. Wylls "Chronology and                                       .
                                                                         19 d'Avezac -Macaya, Marie Armand
     Astronomy in the Maya Area,"                                                     .
                                                                               Pascal Note sur un Mappemonde
     The Maya and Their Neighbors.                                             Turke du XVI° Sidcle, conservde 6
     Memorial volume to Prof. Alfred                                           la bibliothdque de Saint -Marc 6
        .            .
     M Tozzer New York and Lon-                                                       .
                                                                               Venise Paris: Imprimerie de E      .
                 .
     don: D Appleton Century, n.d                                .             Martinet, 1866.
                                                                                  BIBLIOGRAPHY 293
  .
20 Ayusawa, Shintaro. "The Types of                              .
                                                               34 Boland, Charles Michael. They All
      World Maps Made in Japan's Age                                 Discovered America. New York:
      of National Isolation," Imago                                  Doubleday, 1961; Permabook Edi-
      Mundi, X (1953), 125-128.                                      tion, 1963.
  .
21 Babcock, William H          Legendary .                     35. Boyd                         .
                                                                         , William C Genetics and the
      Islands of the Atlantic ("American     .                       Races of Man Boston: Little,       .
      Geographical Society Research                                  Brown, 1952            .
                            . .
      Series," No 8 ) New York: Ameri                      -     .
                                                               36 Braunlich, Erick              .
                                                                                        Zwei turkischen
      can Geographical Society, 1922                       .         Weltkarten aus dem Zeitalter der
  .                                                                              Entdeckungen. Leipsic:
                        .
22 Bagrow, Leo The History of Cartog -                               grossen
                                                                      .                             .
      raphy , ed. R. A. Skelton Cam-               .                 S Hirzel, 1937
                                                                                  . . .
                                                               37. Brooks, C E P Climate through the
      bridge, Mass.: The Harvard Uni                       -
      versity Press, 1964.                                                    .
                                                                     Ages New York: McGraw-Hill,
                                                                     1949.
23.   —   . "A Tale from the Bosphorus.                          .
                                                               38 Brosses, C. de. Histoire des Naviga-
      Some Impressions of My Work at
      the Topkapu Saray Library, Sum-
                                                                     tions aus Torres Australes 2 vols.                     .
      mer of 1954," Imago Mundi , XII
                                                                     Paris: Durand, 1756                     .
      (1955)   .                                                 .
                                                               39 Brown, Lloyd Arnold The Story of          .
                                                                     Maps. Boston: Little, Brown, 1950.
                                .
24. Barnett, Lincoln Treasure of Our                           40. Bunski, Hans Albrecht von "Kemal
                                                                                    -                                   .
                   .
      Tongue New York: Knopf, 1964                         .         Re'is, ein Betrag zur Geschichte
25. Beazley, Charles Raymond. The Dawn                               der turkischen Flotte " Bonn, 1928.        .
      of Modern Geography 3 vols.                .                   (Ph.D. thesis.)
                        .
      London: J Murray, 1897 1906.                -              .
                                                               41 Calahan, Harold Augustin The Sky                      .
26. —      . Prince Henry the Navigator                    .                                    .
                                                                     and the Sailor New York: Harper,
      New York and London, 1895                        .             1952.
                .
27. Belov, M "Mistake or Intention?"                           42. Callis, Helmut G. China , Confucian
       (translated for E. A. Kendall),                               and Communist New York: Henry  .
                            .
      Priroda, No 1 (November, 1960)                       .         Holt, 1959     .
      (Moscow: Soviet Academy of Sci                       -   43. Caras, Roger A. Antarctica Land of                   —
           .
      ences )                                                        Frozen Time . Philadelphia: Chil                               -
28.   —.    "A Windfall Among Manu-                                  ton Books, 1962.
      scripts" (translated for E. A. Ken-                      44. Carli, Carlo Giovanni Dinaede. Let                               -
      dall), Vednyi Transport (August 17,                            tres Americaines. (French transla                              -
      1961) .                                                         tion of his Italian work ) 2 vols.                .
29. Bernardini-Sjoestedt, Armand Chris-            .                  Boston, 1788.
      tophe Colo mb Paris: Les Sept .                          45. Cartografia de Ultramar . Vol I,                             .
      Couleurs, 1961                .                                               .
                                                                      1949; Vol II, 1953; Vol. Ill, 1955;
30. Bibby, Geoffrey. The Testimony of                                     .
                                                                      Vol IV, 1957. Madrid: Ejercito
      the Spade . New York: Knopf; Lon-
                                                                      Servicio Geographico                          .
      don: Collins, 1956.
                                                               46. Cary, M., and E H Warmington     . .                             .
                                                                     The Ancient Explorers. London:
  .                         .
31 Bigelow, John "The So-Called Bar -
                                                                     Methuen, 1929; New York: Pelican
       tholomew Columbus Map of 1506,"
      Geographical Review , October,
                                                                      Books, 1963       .
       1935, pp. 643-656                 .                       .
                                                               47 Chamberlin, Wellman Round Earth               .
                                                                                                .
                                                                      on Flat Paper Washington, D.C.:
                        .
32. Blacket, W S. Lost Histories of                                   National Geographic         Society,
                                    .
      America [ etc.] London: Trubner                                 1950    .
                    .
      and Co , 1883 Now obtainable   .                                                      .
                                                               48. Charlesworth, J K. The Quaternary
      from University Microfilms, Ann                                 Era with Special Reference to Its
       Arbor, Mich ( Xerox) .            .                                          .
                                                                      Glaciation 2 vols London: Ed-             .
33. Blundeville [ Blundivile ], M. Blunde-                            ward Arnold, Ltd , 1957. Vol. II      .                       .
      ville His Exercises         A New      ...                                        .
                                                               49. Chatterton, E Keble. Sailing Ships
       and Necessarie Treatise of Navi -                              and Their Story . New ed. London:
       gation      ...
                    London, 1594                   .                  Sidgewick and Jackson, Ltd., 1923                             .
294      Maps of the Ancient Sea Kings
  .
50 Chevallier, M. "L'Aimantation des                                      .
                                                                        63 Diller, Aubrey. "The Ancient Meas-
      lavas de I'Etna et I'orientation du                                     urements of the Earth," Isis, XL
      champ terrestre en Sidle du Xlle                                         (1948), pp 6-9   .           .
      au XVI le Steele," Annales de Phy -                               64. Directory of Special Libraries and
      sique, IV, 1925, pp. 5-162                            .                  Research Centers, ed Anthony T       .                   .
  .                         .
51 China , Map of Compiled and Drawn
      in the Cartographic Section of the
                                                                               Kruzas. Detroit, Mich : Gale Re-
                                                                               search Company, 1963
                                                                                                                     .
                                                                                                                        .
      National Geographic Society , for                                 65. Durand, Dana B "The Origins of  .
      the National Geographic Maga-                                            German Cartography in the 15th
      zine. Washington, D.C : National                  .                      Century." 3 vols and portfolio   .                       .
      Geographic Society, 1945.                                                (Thesis, Harvard University.)
                                        .
52. Claggett, Marshall Science in Antiq -
                                                                        66.         .  The Vienna-K / osterneuburg
              .
      uity New York: Collier Books,
                                                                               Map Corpus of the 15 th Century                          .
      1963.
53. Commission on the Bibliography of
                                                                                                    .
                                                                               Leiden: E. J Brill, 1952.
      Ancient Maps, International Geo-                                  67. Eames, Wilberforce A List of the    .
                                    .               .                          Editions of Ptolemy' s Geography ,
      physical Union 2 vols Paris, 1952                             .          1475 1730. New York, 1886.
          .
      Pp 63, 93.                                                                        -
54. Cortesao, Armand. The Nautical                                      68. Encyclopaedia Britannica (11th ed.)                         .
      Chart of 1424 and the Early Dis-                                          VII, p. 869.
      covery and Cartographical Repre-                                  69. Encyclopedia of Islam, ed. M. Th.
      sentation of America Coimbra,                     .                      Houtsma, et al. Leiden: E. J Brill,              .
      Portugal: University of Coimbra,                                          1936    .
       1954.                                                            70. Expeditions Polaires Franqaises, Mis                        -
55. Crombie, A. C , ed                  .
                                    Scientific          .                      sions Paul-Emile Victor        "Cam-         .
      Change .      London: Heinemann,                                          pagne au Groenland, 1950, Rap-
       1963       .                                                             ports Pr 6liminaires." "Campagne
56. Cummings, Byron S "Cuicuilco and        .                                   au Groenland, 1951, Rapports
       the Archaic Culture of Mexico,"                                          Pr6liminaires." Paris, 1953.
       Bulletin, University of Arizona, IV,                             71. Facsimiles of Portolan Charts. Publi                        -
          .
       No 8, Nov. 15, 1933                          .                                           .
                                                                                cation No 114 of the Hispanic
57.    —  . "Obituary," Science, CXX,                                           Society of America (Introduction
       No. 3115, Sept. 10, 1954, pp.                                            by Edward Luther Stevenson). New
       407 408- .                                                               York: The Hispanic Society, 1916                        .
58. Dampier, Sir William A History of           .                       72. Fairbridge, Rhodes E. "Dating the
       Science (3rd ed. rev.) New York:             .                           Latest Movements of the Quater                          -
       The Macmillan Company, 1944.                                                               .
                                                                                nary Sea Level " Transactions, New
                      . .
59. Davis, H T Alexandria, the Golden                                                           . .
                                                                                York Acad Sci , Ser. II, XX, No 6,                  .
              .                 .
       City 2 vols Evanston, III : The                      .                   pp. 471-482, April, 1958                    .
       Principia Press of Illinois.
   .
 60 Deetz, Charles H., and Oscar Adams.
                                                                           .
                                                                         73 Fin6, Oronce (Oronteus Finaeus)                             .
       Elements of Map Projection with
                                                                                Sphaera mundi                   ...
                                                                                                       Lvtetiae Pari                    -
        Applications to Map and Chart
                                                                                sorum apud Michaelem Vascasa                            -
                            .
       Construction (U.S Coast and Geo-     .                                   num, 1551       .
       detic Survey "Special Publication,"
                                                                           .                            .
                                                                         74 Fischer, Teobald (Atlas-Series.) Ven                        -
              .
       No 68, Serial No. 146.) Washing-
                                                                                            .
                                                                                ice: Ferd Ongania, editore, 1881                        -
                                                                                1886.
                        .
       ton, D.C : Government Printing
       Office, 1921             .                                        75.            Sammlung Mittelalterlicher
   .
 61 Deissmann, A. Forschungen und                                               Welt und Seekarten italienischen
        Funde im Serai Berlin-Leipsic:          .                               Ursprungs und aus italienischen
                                                                                Bibliotheken und Archiven. Venice:
        1933.
   .                        .
 62 Denuce, Jean Les Origines de la                                             .F Ongania, 1886.
       Cartographic portugaise et les                                      .                            .
                                                                         76 Gallois, Lucien De Orontio Finaeo
       Cartes de Reinel Ghent: E van        .                   .               Gallico Geographo Paris: E Le       .               . -
        Goethem, 1908                   .                                        rous, 1890     .
                                                                                      BIBLIOGRAPHY 295

                        . . .
77. Glanville, S. R K , ed The Legacy of                               .                      .
                                                                     91 Heidel, William The Frame of the
      Egypt . Oxford: The Clarendon                                         Ancient Greek Maps. American Ge-
      Press, 1957 (reprint)                 .                              ographical Society Research Series
  .
78 Goodwin, William A. Letter to James                                        .
                                                                           No 20. New York: The Society,
        .
      A Robertson, May 26, 1933 (anal                       -               1937.
      ysis of the Piri Re'is Map) (Unpub-               .              .                              . .
                                                                     92 Heizer, R. F., and J A Bennyhoff.
      lished: Library of the American                                      "Archaeological Investigation of
      Geographical Society )                    .                          Cuicuilco, Valley of Mexico, 1957,"
79. Gordon, Cyrus H. "The Decipherment                                                    .
                                                                           Science, v 127, No. 3292, pp.
      of Minoan," Natural History , LXXII,                                  232-233   .
      No. 9, November, 1963.                                           .
                                                                     93 Hobbs, William H. "The Fourteenth
  .
80 Gruneisen, W. de Les caractdris- .                                       Century Discoveries by Antonio
      tiques de I' art Copte Florence,              .                       Zeno," The Scientific Monthly,
      Italy: Instituto di Edizione Artistiche                               XXII, Jan., 1951, pp. 24-31             .
      Fratelli Alinari, 1922.                                        94.   —     . "Zeno and the Cartography
  .
81 Guest, Edwin. Origines Celticae and                                      of Greenland," Imago Mundi , VI                 .
      other contributions to the History                               .                          .
                                                                     95 Holtzscherer, J. J , and G. de Q                    .
                    .
      of Britain 2 vols. London: The                                        Robin. "Depth of Polar Ice Caps,"
      MacMillan Co., 1883. (Caesar's                                        Geographical Journal , CXX, Part
      destruction of the Druid library.)                                    2, June, 1954, pp 193-202..
82. A Guide to Historical Cartography .                                                   .
                                                                     96. Hough, Jack "Pleistocene Lithology
      Washington: Map Division, Library                                     of Antarctic Ocean Bottom Sedi                  -
      of Congress, 1954. Revised, 1960.                                     ments," Journal of Geology, LVIII,
                        .
83. Hakki, Ibrahim Topkapi Sarayinde                                        257-259.
      deri uzerine yapilmis eski Hari                        -       97. Humboldt, Alexander von Cosmos:    .
                .
      talar Istanbul, 1936.                                                 A Sketch of a Physical Description
84. Hamy, Jules Theodore Ernest. La                                                                       . .
                                                                            of the Universe (trans E C. Otte)               .
       Mappemonde d' Angelino Dulcert                                       New York: Harpers, 1852.
       de Majorque, 1339 (2nd ed )                          ..       98. Idrisi , World Map. (1150 A.D in               .
       Paris: H. Champion, 1903                         .                   Arabic.) Map Division, Library of
85. Hapgood, Charles H Earth' s Shifting.                                   Congress, 1951 (six sheets)         .
       Crust . New York: Pantheon, 1958.                             99. Irwin, Constance. Fair Gods and
                                .
86. Hawkes, Jacquetta The World of the                                      Stone Faces: Ancient Seafarers and
                .
       Past New York: Knopf, 1963.                                          the World' s Most Intriguing Riddle             .
87. Hawkins, Gerald S. "Stonehenge: A                                                         .
                                                                            New York: St Martin's Press, 1963               .
       Neolithic Computer," Nature, CCII,                           100. Jeans, Sir James. The Growth of
            .
       No 4939 (June 27, 1964), 1258-                                                             .
                                                                            Physical Science A Premier Book:
                .
       1261 Reprinted by the Smith-                                         Fawcett World Library, 1958             .
       sonian Astrophysical Observatory,                               .
                                                                    101 Jervis, W. W. The World in Maps                     .
       Cambridge, Mass.                                                     London: George Philip and Son,
88.    —.    "Stonehenge Decoded," Na-                                      1936  .
       ture CC , No. 4909 (October 26,
           ,                                                        102. Johnston, Thomas Crawford. Did the
                                .
       1963), 306-308 Reprinted by the                                      Phoenicians Discover America? Em                -
       Smithsonian Astrophysical Observ                         -           bracing the origin of the Aztecs,
       atory, Cambridge, Mass.                                              with some further light on Phoeni               -
   .                    .
89 Heathecote, N H. de V. "Early Nau                         -              cian civilization and colonization.
       tical Charts," Annals of Science, I                                  The Story of the Mariner' s Com                 -
       (1963), 13-28        .                                                     .
                                                                             pass San Francisco, 1892. 2 nd ed.
90.    —  . "Christopher Columbus and                                        London: James Nisbet, 1913.
                                                                    103. Jomard, Edme Francois. Les Monu
       the Discovery of Magnetic Varia-                                                                                     -
       tion," Science Progress, XXVII                                        ments de la Geographic . Paris: Du
                    - .
       (1932), 82 103                                                        Prat, 1862.
296       Maps of the Ancient Sea Kings
104. Kahle, Paul. "La Carte Mondiale de                                         119. La Ronci& re, Charles de La D6 cou -          .
       Piri Re 7 is." Actes du XVIII Con-                                              verte de I' Afrique au Moyen Age:
         gress  international des orientalistes .                                      Cartographic et Explorateurs. 3
          Leiden, 1932      .                                                           vols. (in Memoires of the Royal So-
105.     —.     "Die Verschollene Columbus-                                             ciety of the Geography of Egypt,
          Karte von Amerika von Jahre 1498                                              Vols. V, VI, VII)      .
          in einer turkischen Weltkarten von                                    120. Leithauser, Joachim G von. Mappae     .
          1513," Forschungen und Fort -                                                 Mundi : die geistige Eroberung der
                                        .
          schritte, 8 Jahrg No 19 (1 Juli               .                                        .
                                                                                       Welt Berlin: Safari-Verlag, 1958                        .
          1932), pp. 248-249.                                                      .                           .
                                                                                121 Lelewel, Joachim Gdographie du
106.     —.    "The Lost Map of Columbus,"
         The Geographical Review, XXIII,
                                                                                        Moyen Age accompagnd d' Atlas
                                                                                        et de cartes dans chaque Volume .
            .
          No 4 (1933)           .                                                                                  .
                                                                                        Brussels: V. et J Pilliet, 1850-52                     .
107.   Kamal, Prince Youssouf Hallucina-                .                       122 .        . Pytheas de Marseille et la
          tions Scientifiques (Les Portulans ).                                         geographic de son temps. Paris:
                   ..
          Leiden: E J Brill, 1937                           .                           Strasz6 wicz, 1836             .
108.         .   Monumenta Cartographica                                                             . .
                                                                                123. Lewis, W N The Splendid Century .
          Africae et Aegypti 16 vols. in 5      .                           .           Life in the France of Louis XIV .
          Cairo, 1926-1951. ( Vol. IV:                                                  Garden City, N.Y : Doubleday           .
          Epoque des Portulans.)                                                        Anchor Books, 1957.
109.                                .
       Ketman, Georges "The Disturbing                                          124. Libby, Willard F. Radiocarbon Dat-
          Maps of Piri Re is," Science et Vie
                                    7
                                                                                             .
                                                                                        ing Chicago: The Chicago Univer                        -
                            .
          (Paris), Sept , 1960                  .                                       sity Press, 1952       .
110.   Keuning, Johannes "The History of.                                       125. Lucas, Fred W. Annals of the Brothers
          Geographical Map Projection until                                             Nicco / o and Antonio Zeno. London:
          1600," Imago Mundi, XII (1955).                                                .
                                                                                        H Stevens, Son and Stiles, 1898.
111.   Kimble, George Herbert Tinsley Ge-                           .                                      .
                                                                                126. Lynam, Edward The Map -Maker' s
          ography in the Middle Ages. Lon-                                                   .
                                                                                        Art London: The Batchworth Press,
          don: Methuen, 1938                        .                                   1953     .
112.                    .
       Kitson, Arthur Capt James Cook , the .                                      .
                                                                                127 McElroy, John W. "The Ocean Navi                           -
                                        .
          Circumnavigator London: L. Mur -                                              gation of Columbus on His First
       ray, 1907    .                                                                   Voyage," The American Neptune,
113. Koeman, Cornells. Collections of                                                        .         .
                                                                                        Vol I, No 3 (July, 1941)                       .
       Maps and Atlases in the Nether                                       -   128. Maggiolo, Visconte de. Atlas of Porto                     -
       lands . Leiden: E. J. Brill, 1961                                .                              .
                                                                                        Ian Charts New York: The Hispanic
114. Konjnenburg, E. van Shipbuilding           .                                       Society of America, 1911                       .
       from Its Beginnings. 3 vols. Brus-                                                            . .
                                                                                129. Major, R H Voyages of the Zeno
       sels: Permanent International Asso-                                              Brothers. London: The Hakluyt So                       -
       ciation of Congresses of Naviga-                                                 ciety, 1873; Boston: The Massa                         -
       tion, Executive Committee, 1913.                                                 chusetts Historical Society, 1875.
                            .
115. Krachkovsky, J "The Columbus Map                                              .
                                                                                130 Mallery, Arlington H. Lost America.
       of America, Worked in Turkish /                                      7
                                                                                        Washington, D.C : The Overlook .
       Isvestia (Moscow), VGO, XVI                                                      Printing Co., 1951             .
                     .
       (1954), pp 184-186.                                                          .
                                                                                131 Mallery, Arlington H , et al "New      .               .
116. Kretschmer, Konrad. Die italienischen                                               and Old Discoveries in Antarctica,"
       Portolane des Mittelalters; ein Bei-                                              Georgetown University Forum of
       trag zur Geschichte der Kartogra                                     -            the Air, Aug. 26, 1956 (mimeo-
       phie und Nautik Berlin: E. S Mit-.                           .                    graphed verbatim)                 .
       tler, 1909.                                                                  .
                                                                                132 Mapas Espanoles de America , Siglos
117.      —. "Die verschollene Kolumbus-                                                              .
                                                                                         XV-XV // Vorwick Jacobo Maria
       karte von 1498 in einer turkischen                                               del Pilar Carlos Manuel Stuart,
       Weltkarte von 1513" (A Peter                             .           -           Duque de FitzJames, ed , 1878                      .   .
       mans), Mitteilungen, LXXX (1934).                                                Madrid, 1941       .
                                                                                       BIBLIOGRAPHY                297
                                .
133. Marshak, Alexander "Lunar Notation                         149. "Notice of a British Discovery of Ant-
       on Upper Paleolithic Remains/ '                                 arctica in 1819," Blackwood' s
       Science, CXLVI (Nov 6, 1964)     .               .              Magazine, VII ( August, 1920), p.
134. Means, Philip Ainsworth "Pre-Spanish.                             566 .
       Navigation off the Andean Coast,"                        150. Nouvelle      Biographic   Universelle .
       American Neptune, II, No. 2 (April,                             Paris: Firmin Didot Frdres, 1858.
       1942)    .                                                  .                           .
                                                                151 Nowell, Charles E The Great Discov -
135. Mercator, Gerardus. Correspondence                                eries and the First Colonial Em               -
       Mercatorienne, ed. M. van Durme                      .          pires. Ithaca, N.Y.: Cornell Univ.
       Anvers: De Nederlandsche Boek -                                 Press, 4th Printing, 1964.
       handel, 1959     .                                                                .
                                                                152. Nunez, Pedro Tratado da Sphera.
                                .
136. Miller, Konrad, ed Mappae Arabi -                                 Lisbon, 1537       .
        cae. Stuttgart (privately printed),                     153. Nunn, George E. The Geographical
       1926-1929    .                                                  Conceptions of Columbus. New
137.       .  Mappaemundi : Die altesten                               York: American Geographical So-
                                    .
       Weltkarten. 6 vols Stuttgart: Roth,                             ciety, 1924.
       1895-1898    .                                           154. Oberhummer, A. K. "Eine turkische
    .
138 Monumenta Cartographica Africae et                                 Karte zur Endeckung Amerikas,"
        Aegypti , see Kamal             .                              Anzeiger der Akademie der Wis-
    .
139 Monumenta Cartographica Vaticana,                                  senschaften (Vienna ), Philos-histor          -
       ed. Roberto Amalgia 5 vols. Vati     .               -          Kl 68, 1931, pp 99-112.    .
       can City, 1944.                                          155. Oceanographic Atlas of the Polar
    .
140 Morison, Samuel E. Admiral of the                                          .
                                                                       Seas (U.S. Hydrographic Office
       Ocean Sea . Boston: Little, Brown,                                                     .
                                                                       Publication No 705.) Part I, "Ant             -
        1942.                                                          arctica," 1957.
141.       .  Christopher Columbus, Mari                    -                                     .
                                                                156. Oronteus Finaeus Biography See            .
       ner . Mentor Books, 1956.                                       Fin6, Oronce, in Nouvelle Biogra              -
    .
143 Motzo, Bacchisio R., ed. II compasso                               phic Universelle, Paris: Firmin Didot
       da navigare; opera italiana della                               Fr 6 res, 1858     .
        metd del secolo XIII [ etc.] Cagli-         .           157.       .   Cartes Gdographiques des-
        ari: Universita, 1947               .                                                 .
                                                                       signdes par O Find : Galliae totius
                                .
144. Needham, Joseph "Poverties and                                                            .
                                                                       nova descriptio Paris, 1525, 1557;
        Triumphs of Chinese Scientific Tra -                           Venice, 1561, 1566; Cosmographia
                .
        dition " (In Crombie.)                                         universalis: Paris, 1536, 1566
145.    —   . Science and Civilization in                              (lost?)
        China. 3 vols. Cambridge Univer                     -         .            .
                                                                158 Parry, J H. The Age of Reconnais-
        sity Press, 1959    .                                          sance. Mentor Books (No 597),          .
 146. Nordenskiold, A . E. Facsimile- Atlas to                         1963.
        the Early History of Cartography ,                            .
                                                                159 Parsons, Edward Alexander The              .
        with Reproductions of the Most Im-                             Alexandrian Library . Amsterdam,
        portant Maps printed in the XVth                               London, New York: The Elsevier
        and XVIth Centuries. Translated                                Press, 1952.
        from the Swedish original by J. A                   .      .
                                                                160 Pauvels, Louis, and Jacques Bergier.
                                .
        Ekelbf and C. R Markham. Stock                      -          The Dawn of Magic Trans Rollo      .   .
        holm, 1889  .                                                              .
                                                                       Myers London: Anthony Gibbs and
 147.       . Periplus : An Essay in the Early                         Phillips, 1963.
        History of Charts and Sailing Direc-                          .
                                                                161 Pears, Edwin. The Destruction of the
        tions. Translated from the Swedish                             Greek Empire and the Story of the
                        .
        original by F A. Bathev Stockholm:      .                      Capture of Constantinople by the
        Norstedt, 1897      .                                          Turks. New York: Longmans, Green
148. Norlund, Niels Erick Islands Kort- .                              and Co., 1903          .
        laegning en Historisk Fremstilling .                                             .
                                                                162. Penrose, Boies Travel and Discovery
        (Geodaetsk       Instituts Publication                         in the Renaissance, 1420 1620          -      .
        VII.) Copenhagen: Ejnar Munks-                                 Cambridge, Mass : Harvard Uni  .              -
        gaard, 1944.                                                   versity Press, 1955.
298     Maps of the Ancient Sea Kings
   .
163 Petermans, A. Mitteilungen aus Justis                                .
                                                        178. Ronctere See La Roncidre (119)                                  .
        Perthes' Geographischer Anstalt .                                        .
                                                        179. Rotz, John John Rotz : His Books of
        XXXIX, No. 182 (Mercator) Gotha:   .                   Hydrography (1542) (Brit Mus.             .               .
        Justus Perthes, 1915       .                           Ms. 20. E.IX)         .
164. Piri Re'is (Muhiddin ibn Mahmud or                 180. Rouse, Irving. "Prehistory of the West
                               .
        Ahmet Muhiddin) Kitabe Bahriye.                        Indies," Science, CXLIV, no. 3618,
        2 vols. Berlin: De Gruyter, 1926       .               May 11, 1964.
   .
165 Pohl, Frederick J. Atlantic Crossings                  .
                                                        181 Salinari, Marina Emiliani " An Atlas             .
        Before Columbus. New York:                             of the 15th Century Preserved in
              .
        W. W Norton, 1961.                                     the Library of the former Serail in
166. Portugaliae Monumenta Cartograph-                         Constantinople," Imago Mundi ,
        ica, ed. Armando Cortesao and                                .
                                                               Vol Ill, 1951, pp 101 102         .           - .
        Avelino Teixeiro da Mota 4 vols.   .            182. Santarem, Vicomte de. Atlas Com-
        (Portuguese and English) Lisbon,                       post de Mappemondes, de portu-
        1960.                                                  lans et de cartes hydrographiques
167. Price, Derek de Solla. "An Ancient                        et historiques depuis le Vl ° jus-
        Greek Computer," The Scientific                        qu' au XVII° Siec / e [ etc.]                         .
        American. CC, No. 6 (June, 1959)            .   183. Sarton, George. A Guide to the His-
                           .
168. Ptolemy, Claudius The Geography ,                         tory of Science New York: The     .
        translated and edited by Edward                        Ronald Press Co , 1952.           .
        Luther Stevenson, with reproduc             -   184.         .
                                                                     Hellenistic Science and Culture
                               .
        tions of the maps New York: The                        in the Last Three Centuries B .C .
        New York Public Library, 1932          .               Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard Uni-
   .
169 Pull6, Francesco Lorenzo. La Carto-                        versity Press, 1952.
        graphic antica dell' lndia . (Vol I:    .       185. Schlumberger, Gustave. Le sidge, la
        Byzantine and Arab; Vol. II: Medi-                      prise et le sac de Constantinople
        eval and Early Renaissance; Vol             .           par les turcs en 1453 . Paris: Li-
        II, Supplement: The Orient; Vol.                       brarie Plon, 1913 ( reprinted with
        Ill: The Century of the Discovery)
                   .
                                                                slight changes no date before—                           —
             -
        1901 1932                                                  1935) .
    .
170 "Radiocarbon": Supplement of the
                                                        186 .                                .
                                                                Schutt, Gudmund Ptolemy' s Maps of
         American Journal of Science, I VII    —                  Northern Europe : A Reconstruction
             -
        (1959 1965), New Haven: The
                                                                   of the Prototypes. (Royal Danish
        Yale University Press      .                              Geographical Society) Copenha                                  -
   .
171 Rainaud, Armand. Le Continent Aus-                             gen: H. Hagerup, 1917                         .
        tral, hypotheses et dtcouvertes.
        Paris: Armand Colin, 1893.
                                                        187 .                .           .
                                                                Selen, H Sadi Piri Re' is in Sima / i
    .                  .
172 Ravenstein, E. G Martin Behaim, His                                          .
                                                                   Amerika Haritasi Bulletin, No                                 .
                                                                   Il'den ayri basim Istanbul: Devlet
        Life and Works. London: George
         Philip and Son, 1908          .                           Basimevi, 1937            .
   .                       .
173 Rawlinson, George The Five Great                    189.                             .
                                                                Sharpe, Samuel Alexandrian Chro-
                                                                   nology from the Building of the
        Monarchies of the Ancient Eastern
                                                                   City until Its Conquest by the
        World . 4th ed., 3 vols. New York:
         Scribner and Welford, 1880.                                                 .
                                                                    Arabs (A.D 640) London, 1857     .
                       .
175. Reymond, Arnold History of the Sci-
                                                                   (no publisher)        .
         ences in Graeco-Roman Antiquity .              190.                                     .
                                                                Silverberg, Robert Lost Cities and
         Trans. Ruth de Bray New York: .                           Vanished Civilizations. Philadel                              -
         E. P. Dutton, 1932.                                       phia: Chilton Books, 1962                         .
 176. Ristow, W. W., and C. E. Legear A         .       191 .   Stahl, William Harris Ptolemy' s Ge- .
         Guide to Historical Cartography                           ography : A select bibliography .
                       .
         (2 nd rev. ed.) Washington, D.C :          .              New York: The New York Public
         The Library of Congress, 1960.                            Library, 1953         .
    .
 177 Robbins, Roland W., and Evan Jones.                192.    Stefansson, Vilhjalmur Greenland .       .
         Hidden America. New York: Knopf,                          New York: Doubleday, Doran and
        1959.                                                      Company, 1942                 .
                                                                           BIBLIOGRAPHY 299
                        .
193. Steger, Ernst Untersuchungen uber                  207.      .    Maps and Map Makers Lon-            .
        italienische seekarten des mittelal-                               . .
                                                               don: B T Botsford, Ltd , 1949,          .
       ters auf grund der kartometrischen                       1952.
                    .
        methode Gottingen: W. F. Kaest-                                            .
                                                        208. True, David O "Correspondence re -
        ner, 1896       .                                      lating to the Piri Re'is Map." (In
                                .
194. Stevens, Henry Johann Schoner : a                          files of the American Geographic
        reproduction of his globe of 1523                      Society, New York City.)
                    .
        long lost London: H. Stevens &                  209. Tseukernik, David. (An article entitled
        Son, 1888.                                              "Did Columbus Discover America ?"
195. Stevenson, Edward Luther. Marine                           summarizing an article written by
       World Chart of Nico /o de Canerio                        this author and previously pub -
                                    .
        Januensis ( 1502 ) New York: The                        lished in the Soviet publication
        De Vinne Press, 1908.                                   Novy Mir was published in the
196.         . Terrestrial and Celestial                        English language paper, USSR,
        Globes, Their History and Construc-                     October, 1963.)
                        .
        tion [ etc.] 2 vols. New Haven:                                                .
                                                        210. Uhden, Richard "The Oldest Original
        published for the Hispanic Society                      Portuguese Chart of the Indian
        of America by the Yale University                       Ocean, A.D. 1509," Imago Mundi ,
        Press, 1921.                                            III, 1939      .
   .
197 Strabo. The Geography of Strabo .                                      .
                                                        211. Verrill, A Hyatt. America' s Ancient
        (Trans, by Horace Leonard Jones)                                           .
                                                                Civilizations New York : Putnam,
        The Loeb Classical Library. Lon-                        1953   .
        don: Heinemann; New York: Put-                  212. Villiers, Alan John. Men, Ships and
        nam, 1923-28.                                           the Sea . Washington, D.C.: Na -
                .
199. Taylor, E G. R. The Haven -Finding                         tional Geographic Society, 1962                    .
         Art : A History of Navigation from
        Odysseus to Captain Cook . New
                                                        213.         . Wild Ocean. New York: Mc-
                                                                 Graw-Hill, 1957.
         York: Abelard- Schuman Ltd., 1957.             214. Wadler, Arnold D. The Origin of Lan
200.    —    . "Jean Rotz and the Marine                                                                           -
                                                                 guage. New York: The American
         Chart," Journal of the Institute of                     Press for Art and Science, 1948.
         Navigation, VII, No 2 ( April,         .       215. Waltari, Mika. The Wanderer . New
         1954), pp. 136-143.
                                                                 York: Putnam, 1951; Pocket Books,
201.        .  "The Navigating Manual of                         1964. (Chapter on Piri Re'is)
         Columbus," Journal of the Institute
         of Navigation , V, No. 1 (January,                 .                          .
                                                        216 Waerden, B. L van der Basic Ideas      .
                                                                 and Methods in Babylonian and
         1952), pp. 42-54               .                        Greek Astronomy (in Crombie ).
 202 .      .   "The Oldest Mediterranean
                                                        217. Wieder, F. C., ed. Monumenta Carto-
         Pilot (Carta Pisana )," Journal of
         the Institute of Navigation, IV, 81                     graphica: Reproductions of Unique
         (1951) .                                                                              .
                                                                 and Rare Maps 5 vols. The Hague:
    .
 203 Teleki, Paul. Atlas zur Geschichte der                      Nijhoff, 1925-1933.
         Kartographes der japonischen In-                                                  .
                                                        218. Wilson, A. Tuzo "Continental Drift,"
         seln. Budapest, 1909; Leipsic:                          Scientific American , CCVIII, no 4,           .
         K. W. Hiersemann, 1909.                                 April, 1963, pp. 2-16.
    .                       .
 204 Thalamas, A La Geographic [ de                         .                          .
                                                        219 Winsor, Justin A Bibliography of
                                .
         Eratosthenes ] (Ph.D Thesis, Har - .                    Ptolemy' s Geography . Cambridge,
          vard University, 1921 )               .                Mass.: Harvard University Press,
    .
 205 Thompson, James W Ancient Librar - .                      1884.
           .
         ies University of California Press,            220.       .Narrative and Critical History
         1940.                                                                     .
                                                               of America Boston and New York:
                            .
 206. Tooley, R. V Maps of Antarctica : A                      Houghton Mifflin & Co., 1889.
         list of early maps of the South                221. Winter, Heinrich. "Catalan Portolan
         Polar Regions. Map Collectors' Cir-                   Maps and Their Place in the Total
          cle, Durrant House, Chiswell Street,                 View of Cartographic Develop-
          London E.C. 1, England                    .          ment," Imago Mundi , XI (1954)                  .
300     Maps of the Ancient Sea Kings
222 .   —.  "A Late Portolan Chart at            227. Wright, Helen S. The Seventh Conti-
        Madrid, and Late Portolan Charts               nent . Boston: Richard G. Badger;
        in General," Imago Mundi, VII                  New York: The Gorham Press,
        (1950)       .                                  1918.
223 .        . "The Origin of the Sea-Chart,"                                 .
                                                 228. Wright, John Kirtland The Geo-
        Imago Mundi , XIII (1951), PP        .         graphical Lore of the Time of the
                 .
        39 ff ( See also Imago Mundi , Vol   .                       .
                                                       Crusades New York: The American
        V, for his reply to Richard Uhden              Geographical Society, 1925.
                 .
        [ Vol I] on question of compass ).       229.   —   . The Leardo Map of the World ,
224 .        .                       .
             "The True Position of H Wag-               1452 1453 . " American Geograph-
                                                                 -
        ner in the Controversy of the Com-             ical Society Library Series/' No 4,.
        pass Chart," Imago Mundi, V                     1928     .
        (1948)       .                           230. Wright, John Kirtland, and Elizabeth
                              .
225. Worcester, Donald E , and Wendell                   .
                                                       T Platt. Aids to Geographical Re-
         .                .
      C Schaeffer The Growth and Cul -                 search. New York: American Geo-
      ture of Latin America . New York:                graphical Society Research Series,
      Oxford University Press, 1956      .                   .
                                                       No 22, 1947.
    .
226 World Map , Miller Cylindrical Projec-          .
                                                 231 Wytfleet, Corneille. Descriptionis Pro-
      tion, 1 Degree Grid Prepared by                  lemaicae Augmentum         . Louvain:
      the American Geographical Society                 lonannis Bogardi, 1598 ( Antarctic
                         ..
      for the U S Department of State .                              .        .
                                                       map, pp 100-101) Republished
      "Outline Series No. 7." Drawn by                  1964 in Amsterdam and Israel with
      William Briesemeister.                                              .
                                                        introduction by R A. Skelton  .
Index

Aden , on Hadji Ahmed map, 265               Amundsen Sea
Aegean Sea                                     on Finacus map, 92
  on Dc Cancrio map, 272                       on Mercator map, 102, 105, 265, 266
  modern map of , 177                        Andes, on Piri Rc’is map, 68, 260
  on Zara map, 176, 177, 185                 Andreas cape, on Dulccrt portolano, 269
Africa                                       Andros Island , on Piri Rc’is map, 256
  on De Canerio map, 117, 120, 121,          Annobon Islands, on Piri Rc’is map, 254
     123, 272, 273, 274                      Antalya , on Dulcert portolano, 269, 271
  on Hadji Ahmed map, 99                     Antarctic Circle
  on Mercator map, 267                         on Finaeus map, 87, 88, 185, 260-264
  on Piri Re’is map, 31, 33-34, 39-49,         on Mercator map, 106
     73, 74, 99, 117, 254
  on Venetian chart, 128, 275
                                             Antarctic Peninsula . See Palmer Penin
                                                  sula
                                                                                         -
Age of maps, evidence for, 185-190           Antarctica
Aguia Port, on Mercator map, 266               on Finaeus map, 79-98, 185
Ahmed , Hadji, 99-102                          four maps of , 84-85
  See also Hadji Ahmed map                     glacial history of , 89-98, 99
Akcura Yusuf , 211-215, 219                    on Hadji Ahmed map, 99-102
Alaska , and land bridge to Siberia , 99       ice cap on , 186
Alexander I Island , on Mercator map,             See also Glaciation
     102, 105, 265, 266                        on Mercator maps , 102-111 , 185, 235,
Alexander VI, Pope, 22                            265, 266
Alexandria                                     modern map of , 90
  on Bcnincasa map, 285                        on Piri Re’is map, 2, 19, 72-77, 98, 99,
  as center of Piri Rc’is map, 22                 181, 185, 259
  Coptic art in , 175                          rivers in , 83, 93, 96, 98, 187, 189, 244
  on De Canerio map, 272, 274                  Ross Sea cores from , 96-98, 185, 189,
  on Dulcert portolano, 116, 269                  235
  Library of , 11 , 159, 181, 195              subglacial topography of , 90, 92 , 94-
  meridian of , 31, 40 , 104, 120, 129,           95
     142, 152, 181 , 249, 252, 282             warm periods in , 185, 186
  on Zara map, 287                           Antigua , on Piri Rc’ is map, 258
Ali Nur Bey, 215                             Antikythcra , island of , 198
Alps                                         Antillia , on Piri Rc’ is map, 65, 260
  on Bcnincasa map, 284                      Apianus, map of , 226
  on Zara map, 287                           Arabia
Amazon River                                   on De Canerio map, 121 , 273
  on Hadji Ahmed map, 264                      on Rcincl map, 277
  on Mercator map, 107                       Arabs
  on Piri Rc’is map, 30 , 64, 65, 68, 107,     burning library, 195-196
     257                                       maps of , 11 , 49 , 54, 181 , 217, 222, 242
Ambrc cape, on Rcincl map, 277                 preserving culture, 199
Amirante Islands, on Reinel map, 277         Arcachon , on Zara map, 286
Amsterdam University, 129, 236               Archaic Period , Mexican , 200 , 201, 203
302    Index
Arctic maps                                 Batum ( cont.)
  Benincasa map, 167-169                      on Dc Canerio map, 120, 121, 122,
  early maps, 185                               272, 274
  Ptolemaic map, 159-167                      on Dulcert portolano, 269, 271
  Zara portolano, 169-178                   Beardmore Glacier
  Zeno map, 149-158                           on Finaeus map, 93, 262
Argentina                                     on Mercator map, 266
  on Mercator map, 266                      Beatus medieval world map, 6
  on Piri Re’is map, 258                    Behaim Globe, 58, 61
Arica , on Mercator map, 266                Bchaim map of St. Lawrence River, 58,
Aristotle, 196                                  59
Ascension Island , on Rcinel map, 277       Belle Isle
Assam , on Dulcert portolano, 116             on Dulcert portolano, 268, 270
Assyria , archaeology in , 197                on Zara map, 170
Aswan , on Dulcert portolano, 269, 271      Bellingshausen Sea
Atholl cape , on Zeno map, 156, 281, 282      on Buache map, 93
Atlantic Islands                              on Finaeus map, 189
  on Piri Re’is map, 40, 49, 65, 70-72,       on Mercator map, 102, 105, 265
      255, 258-259, 260                     Ben Zara map. See Zara map
  on Reinel map, 134                        Bcngazi
Atlantic Ocean , modern bathymetric map       on Bcnincasa map, 285
      of , 68                                 on Dc Canerio map, 120 , 272, 274
Atrato River , on Piri Re’is map, 69, 258     on Dulcert portolano, 269
Australia , on Reinel map, 134-135, 278       on Zara map, 287
Avesac- Macaya , Marie Armand de, 99        Benguela , on Venetian chart , 128, 276
Axis of earth , changes of , 187            Bcnincasa map, 166, 167-169, 173, 178
Azimuthal map projection , 225                geographical tabic of , 283-285
Azores                                        glaciers indicated on , 185, 190
   on Mercator map, 104                       grid construction for, 167, 168
  on Piri Re’is map, 255                      latitudes on , 167
Azov Sea , on Zara map, 173, 288              longitude on , 167
                                              orientation of , 167
Babylon , rediscovery of , 197                source map for , 169
Babylonian science, 184-185, 198, 237
     238, 242
                                       —    Berenice, as center of Piri Re’ is map, 30
                                            Bering Strait , modern map of , 101
Bacon , Francis, 199                        Bcrkncr Island , on Finacus map, 264
Bacon , Roger, 199                          Bijagos Islands
Bahia Blanca , on Piri Rc’is map, 71, 258     on Piri Re’is map, 254
Bahia Grande, on Piri Re’is map, 259          on Venetian chart, 275, 276
Bahia Sao Marcos, on Piri Re'is map, 257    Black Sea
Bahriye, 54, 216, 217, 220                    on Benincasa map, 284
Baltic area                                   on Dc Canerio map, 120 , 121 , 122,
  on Benincasa map, 167, 169                     183, 273, 274
  on De Cancrio map, 121, 273                 on Dulccrt portolano, 35, 116, 120
  on Dulccrt portolano, 116                   portolan charts of , 5, 9, 183
  glacial map of , 170                        Ptolemy’s map of , 10, 35
  on Ptolemy’s map of the North , 164       Blanc, Cape
Baraw, Ruth , 22, 30 , 70, 75                 on Dc Canerio map, 272, 274
Barnett, Lincoln , 204                        on Piri Re’is map, 254
Bartholomew Columbus Map, 41, 46              on Venetian chart , 275, 276
Batchelder, George, 24, 25                  Blundeville, constructing portolan design ,
Batum                                            224-225
  on Benincasa map, 167, 285                Bolivia , on Mercator map, 266
                                                                    Index 303
Bon , Cape                               Cape of Good Hope (cont.)
  on Bcnincasa map, 167, 284               on Mercator map, 267
  on Dc Canerio map, 120, 272, 274       Cape Town , on Reinel map, 277
  on Dulcert portolano, 116, 268         Cape Verde Islands
  on Zara map, 287                         and Demarcation Line, 19, 24, 25
Bordone map, 45, 61, 62                    maps of , 39, 65
Bosphorus                                  on Mercator map, 104
  on Benincasa map, 285                    on Piri Re’is map, 255
  on De Canerio map, 120, 272, 274         on Venetian chart , 275, 276
  on Dulcert portolano, 269, 271         Caribbean area , on Piri Re’is map, 30 ,
  on Zara map, 288                            50-64, 69-70, 135, 183, 255, 257-
Boston College, 2                             258
Bothnia Gulf , on Bcnincasa map, 169     Carnegie Institution , Washington, 96
Botta , Paul Emile, 197                  Carnsore Point, on Zara map, 287
Brazil , Demarcation Line through , 24   Caroline Islands, on Reinel chart, 134,
Brest                                         143, 278
  on Bcnincasa map, 284                  Carpathian Mountains, on Ptolemy’s
  on De Canerio map, 273, 274                 map of the North , 165
  on Dulcert portolano, 267, 270         Carroll, James, 245
  on Piri Re’is map, 255                 Cartagena , on Dulcert portolano, 268
  on Zara map, 170                       Carter , David , 245
Briescmeister, William , 122             Carthage, Library of , 196
Britain . See England                    Carthaginians, 9, 113, 116
Brogger, A. W., 241
Brown , Hugh Auchincloss, 188
                                                                                  —
                                         Cartographic tradition , antiquity of , 185
                                              190
Buache map, 65, 67, 93                   Casey Bay
Bureau of Standards, 122                   on Finaeus map, 261
Burroughs, Lorenzo, 28, 29, 233, 244-      on Mercator map, 105
    245                                  Catalan map, 9
Byrd Antarctic Expedition , 96           Cavally River, on Piri Rc’is map, 254

Cabot, Sebastian , 58
                                         Central America , on Piri Re’is map, 2 56
                                              257, 258
                                                                                  —
Caesar, Julius, 195                      Ceylon
Cairo                                      on Hadji Ahmed map, 265
  on Benincasa map, 167                    on Reinel map, 278
  map centered on , 135                  Chaldeans, 198
  on Piri Rc’is map, 51, 52              Champollion , 197
Calais                                   Cherbourg
  on Benincasa map, 284                    on Benincasa map, 284
  on Dulcert portolano, 267, 270           on Zara map, 286
  on Zara map, 286                       Chicago University, 199
Calendars, early, 197, 198, 199          Chile
California Gulf , on Hadji Ahmed map,      on Hadji Ahmed map, 264
    265                                    on Mercator map, 266
Campbell , James, 3, 188, 189            China
Canary Islands                             ancient science of , 185, 238
  on Dulcert portolano, 268                modem map of , 147
  on Mercator map, 104                     twelfth century map of , 135-147
  on Piri Re’is map, 39, 65, 255              geographical table for , 278-281
Cantino map, 41                               grid construction for, 138-139, 184
Cao, Diogo, 124                               latitude on , 138, 145, 146, 280
Cape of Good Hope                             longitude on , 139 , 145, 146, 281
  on De Canerio map, 121, 122, 271,           projection of , 122, 228, 231
     274                                      rivers on, 139, 144
304    Index
China , twelfth century map of ( cont.)     Crete
     trigonometric basis for, 139, 145        on Bcnincasa map, 285
Choisy, Abb6 de, 42                           civilization of , 194, 197
Chronometer, development of , 41              on De Canerio map, 120, 272, 274
Chubua River , on Piri Re’is map, 258         on Dulccrt portolano, 269
Cipango, map of , 61                          modern map of , 56
Circle of 360 degrees, use of , 125, 184,     on Piri Rc’is map, 56
     238
Circumference of earth , knowledge of ,
                                            Crust of earth , displacement of , 188
                                                 189, 239
                                                                                   —
     31-33, 88, 104-105, 157, 181, 193,     Cuba
     252                                      latitude of , on early maps, 41
Civilizations, ancient , 193-206              modern map of , 60
Clagett, on science in antiquity, 237
     238
Clarke, J . Brent, 215
                                       —      on Piri Rc’is map, 51, 60-63, 255
                                            Cuicuilco, pyramid of , 199-204, 240-
                                                241
Clear, Cape                                 Cummings, Byron , 200-202 , 240-241
  on Bcnincasa map, 284                     Cyprus
  on De Caneiro map, 273, 274                 on Benincasa map, 285
  on Dulcert portolano, 267, 270              on De Canerio map, 120, 272
  on Zara map, 173, 287                       on Dulcert portolano, 269, 274
Climates, ancient , 186-187                   on Zara map, 287
Colombia, on Mercator map, 266
Colorado River, Argentina , on Piri Re’is   Dakar
     map, 258                                 on Dc Canciro map, 272, 274
Columbus, 1, 2, 41, 54, 58, 59, 61, 62,       on Piri Re’is map, 254
     64, 69-70, 213-214, 217, 218, 219,       on Venetian chart, 274, 275, 276
     220, 222                               Danube River
Comore Islands, on Reinel map, 277            on Benincasa map, 284
Compass courses on maps, 9, 11                on Dulcert portolano, 269, 271
Compass declination , in Mediterranean ,    Dart cape, on Mercator map, 102, 105,
     116                                        265
Computer, ancient, 198                      Dartmouth College Library, 16
Congo River                                 Darwin , Charles, 197
  on De Canerio map, 121, 271, 274          Dc Canerio map, 35, 117-125, 145, 176,
  on Reincl map, 277                             183
  on Venetian chart, 128, 276                 Africa on , 117, 120, 121, 123, 272,
Constantinople, map collections in , 1,          273, 274
     58-59, 158                               compared with Dulccrt portolano, 120
Constellations, for navigation , 184, 242     geographical table of , 271-273
Continental drift theory, 187-188             grid construction for, 120, 122
Cook , Captain , 73                           latitudes on , 117, 120, 121, 122
Copenhagen , on Zeno map, 282                 longitude on , 117, 120, 121, 122
Copernicus, 197                               orientation of , 117, 120, 121
Coptic art, 175                               projection of , 228, 231
Corantijn River, on Piri Rc’is map, 256       source map for , 117, 121, 123
Cordiform projection , 183, 226, 233,         trigonometry of , 253
     234, 244                               De Canestris map, 128-134, 136-137
Corfu , on Dulcert portolano, 269, 271        orientation of , 129, 138
Corsica                                     Demarcation Lines, Papal , 22, 23, 24, 25
  on Dulcert portolano, 268                 Denman glacier
  on Piri Re’is map, 55                       on Finaeus map, 261
Cortcsao, 123                                 on Mercator map, 266
Cosa map, 41 , 43                           Denmark
Covault , Richard , 245                       on Benincasa map, 169
                                                                     Index 305
Denmark (cont.)                             Elbe River ( cont.)
  on Dc Canerio map, 273                      on Zara map, 287
  on Zeno map, 152, 282, 283                  on Zeno map, 282, 283
Desordam Mountains, on Piri Re’is map,      Ellsworth Land
     257                                      on Finaeus map, 90, 92, 263-264
Diaz, Bartholomew, 124                        on Mercator map, 102, 265
Djcrba Island                               Endcrby Land
  on Bcnincasa map, 285                       on Finaeus map, 89, 261
  on Zara map, 287                            on Mercator map, 104, 266
Dolphin Ridge, 65                           England
Dominican Republic, on Piri Re’is map,        on Bcnincasa map, 169, 185, 284
    61, 256                                   on Dulcert portolano, 267, 271
Don River , on Dulcert portolano, 269,        on Ptolemy’s map of the North , 164,
     271                                        185
Donn , Professor, 188                         on Zara map, 178, 185, 286
Douro River, on Zara map, 286               Ensenada di Tuinaco, on Mercator map,
Dover , Clifton , 245                           266
Dow, Clayton, 25                            Equator
Drake Passage                                 on Piri Re’is map, 26, 27, 30, 33, 42,
  omitted on Finacus map, 83                    49 , 64, 70, 227
  omitted on Piri Re’is map, 72, 75, 83,      on Venetian chart, 128
    259                                     Equidistant polar projection , 135, 226
Drygalski Mountains, on Piri Re’is map,       on Finaeus map, 87
    259                                       on Piri Rc’is map, 51, 183
Dulcert portolano, 5, 8, 35, 113-117,       Equinoxes, precession of , 32
    164                                     Eratosthenes, 22, 31, 32, 33, 125, 128,
 analysis of , 270-271                           181, 252
 compared with Dc Canerio map, 120            maps of , 14, 113
 compared with Piri Re’is map, 5            Essequibo River, on Piri Re’is map, 256,
 compared with Ptolemy’s map, 10, 35,            257
    164                                     Estes, Leo, 16, 19, 24, 25, 50
 geographical table of , 267-269            Europe
 grid construction for, 113-116               on De Canerio map, 121, 122, 273,
 orientation of , 116                           274
                                              on Dulcert portolano, 116
Eclipses, timing of , 41                      on Piri Re’is map, 39, 255
Ecuador, on Mercator map, 266               Evans, Arthur, 197
Edison , Thomas A., 3                       Ewing, Professor, 188
Edith Ronne Land , 90
Edscl Ford Mountains in Antarctica , 186    Faces, on Zara map, 173-174
  on Finacus map, 263                       Falkland Islands
Edward VIII Bay                               on Mercator map, 266
  on Finaeus map, 261                         on Piri Rc’is map, 72, 259
  on Mercator map, 105                      Farewell cape, on Zeno map, 156, 157,
Egypt                                            281, 282
  ancient science in , 185, 197, 198, 237   Faroe Islands
  archaeology in , 197                        on Zara map, 289
  conquest of , 195                           on Zeno map, 1 52, 282
  on Dulcert portolano, 116                 Fernando da Naronha , on Piri Re’is map,
  on Piri Rc’is map, 22, 30, 51, 52, 54          260
Eight-wind system , 125, 184                Fernando Po Island , on Venetian chart,
Einstein , Albert, 189, 239                     275, 276
Elbe River                                  Finaeus map, 72, 79-98, 99, 107, 149,
  on Benincasa map, 284                         234
306     Index
Finaeus map ( cont.)                        Gastaldi, Giacomo, 72
  accuracy of , 88                          Genoa , on Zara map, 288
  Antarctic Circle on , 87, 88, 185         Geographic , 11
  Antarctica on , 83, 93, 185, 260-264      Geographical tables
  compared with other maps, 84-85, 86,        of Benincasa map, 283-285
     102, 104, 106, 234                       of Chinese map, 278-281
  Drake Passage omission , 83                 of Dc Canerio map, 271-273
  80 th parallel on , 88, 101 , 106, 185,                               -
                                              of Dulccrt portolano, 267 269
     238                                      of Finaeus map, 260-264
  equidistant polar projection of , 87
  errors in , 89
                                                                        -
                                              of Hadji Ahmed map, 264 265
                                              of Mercator maps, 265-267
  geographic tables of , 260-264              of Piri Rc’is map, 254-260
  glaciation on , 83, 89-93, 98, 189          of Rcincl map, 277-278
  grid construction for, 87-88                of Venetian chart, 274-276
  Mediterranean on , 93                                        -
                                              of Zara map, 285 290
  meridians on , 89, 93                                        -
                                              of Zeno map, 281 283
                                            Geological studies, 185-190
  projection of , 87, 102, 183, 226, 233
  rivers on , 83, 93, 96, 98, 189, 244      Georgetown University Observatory, 2
  Ross Sea on , 83, 89, 92, 93-97, 262,     Gerlach , Arch C., 79
      264                                   Germany
  source map for , 87, 89, 93, 96, 233,       on Benincasa map, 169, 185
      244-245                                 on Ptolemy’s map of the North , 164,
  South America on , 83, 93                     185
  South Pole on , 79, 87, 98, 233             on Zara map, 185
  traverses on , 83                           on Zeno map, 152 , 282, 283
  Weddell Sea on , 92, 264                  Gibraltar
Finistcrrc, Cape                              on Benincasa map, 167, 283
  on Benincasa map, 283                       on De Canerio map, 120, 121, 122,
  on Dc Canerio map, 273, 274                   272, 274
  on Dulcert portolano, 268, 270              on Dulcert portolano, 116, 268, 270
  on Piri Re’is map, 255                      on Hadji Ahmed map, 264
  on Zara map, 286, 290                       meridian of , for Dulcert portolano, 116
Fletcher Islands, on Mercator map, 102 ,      on Piri Re’is map, 57, 255
     105, 265                                 on Zara map, 173, 286
Fogg Museum , Harvard , 175                 Gironde River
Fontcnay, Father, 42                          on Dulccrt portolano, 268, 270
France                                        on Piri Rc’is map, 255
  on Dulcert portolano, 267                   on Zara map, 170, 286
  on Zara map, 170, 286                     Glaciation
Frankland , John , 122, 253                   in Antarctica , 76, 77, 89-98, 99, 186
Freetown                                      Baltic map of , 170
  on Dc Cancrio map, 121, 272, 274            on Benincasa map, 169, 185, 190
  on Piri Rc’is map, 254                      on Finacus map, 83, 89-93, 98, 189
  on Venetian chart, 275, 276                 indicated on early maps, 185
Frio, Cape                                    on Piri Rc’is map, 75
  on Hadji Ahmed map, 264                     on Ptolemy’s map of the North , 164,
                       —
  on Piri Rc’is map, 70 71, 257, 258             185, 190
                                              Ross Sea cores, 96-98, 185, 189, 235
Gallinas, on Piri Rc’is map, 256              studies of Ice Ages, 188
Gama , Vasco da, 124                          on Zara map, 178, 185, 190
Gambia River                                  on Zeno map, 152, 1 54
  on Piri Re’is map, 254                    Gnomonic map projection , 226, 245
  on Venetian chart, 275, 276               Goodwin , William , 70
Gamio, Manuel , 200                         Gough Island , on Piri Re’is map, 260
                                                                        Index 307
Greece                                         Herlacher, Cape
  ancient science of , 185, 198                  on Finacus map, 263
  early cartographers in, 11, 16, 49, 182        on Mercator map, 102, 105, 265
  measure of length in , 32-33, 181            Heyden , Francis, 2
  scholars from , in Italy, 59                 Hipparchus, 31-32 , 51, 54, 128, 181,
Greenland                                           182
  on Mercator map, 107                         Hispaniola
  on Ptolemy’s map of the North , 164            location of , 42, 61, 63, 64
  on Vinland map, 245                            on Piri Re’is map, 256
  on Zeno map, 1 52, 1 54, 1 55, 1 56, 1 57,   Hobbs, William , 155
     281, 282, 283                             Holand , Hjalmar, 58
Gruneiscn , W. de, 175                         Hondius, map of , 72
Guadaloupe, on Piri Re’is map, 257             Honduras, on Piri Rc’is map, 256, 258
Guadalquivir River                             Hood , James, 245
  on Benincasa map, 283                        Horn , Cape
  on Dulccrt portolano, 268, 270                 on Finacus map, 83
  on Piri Re’is map, 255                         on Hadji Ahmed map, 264
  on Zara map, 176, 178, 185, 286, 289           on Mercator map, 107
Guardafui Cape, on Reinel map, 277               on Piri Re’is map, 70, 72
Guayaquil Gulf , on Mercator map, 266          Hough , Jack , 96, 186, 235
Guinea coast, on Piri Re’is map, 33, 42,       Hudson River, on Hadji Ahmed map,
     49, 73, 74                                    264
Guir , Cape                                    Hwang Ho River, on Chinese map, 139,
  on Benincasa map, 283                            278
  on Zara map, 285
Gunnbiorn 's Skerries, 155                     Ibn Ben Zara . See Zara map
Gurupi Mountains, on Piri Re’is map,           Ice Ages, studies of , 188
     257                                          See also Glaciation
                                               Iceland , on Zeno map, 152, 1 55, 282
Hadji Ahmed map of Antarctica , 99-102         Idrisi , world map of , 12
  distortion of , 101-102                      India
  80 th parallel on , 101                        ancient science in, 238
  and Finaeus map, 234                           on Dulcert portolano, 269
  geographical tables of , 264-265             Indian Ocean
  latitudes on , 101                             on De Canerio map, 121, 123
  longitude on , 101                             on Dulcert portolano, 116
  meridians on, 99, 101                                                          -
                                                  Reinel chart of , 134-135, 140 143,
  projection on , 101                              277-278
  source maps for, 99                          Indus River
Haiti                                             civilization near, 197
  on Hadji Ahmed map, 264                         on Rcinel map, 278
  latitude of , on early maps, 41              Ionium method of dating sea cores, 96
  on Piri Re’is map, 61, 256                   Ireland
Halgrcn , Charles, 89, 122                        on Benincasa map, 167, 185, 284
                                                  on De Canerio map, 121, 122, 273
Hapgood , Mrs. Norman , 175                       on Dulcert portolano, 116, 267, 270
Hartz Mountains, on Ptolemy’s map of              on Ptolemy’s map of the North , 164,
     the North , 164                               185
Harvard University, 175                           on Zara map, 173, 178, 185, 287
Hawkes, Jaquetta , 197                         Isroe, Alfred , 125, 127, 129, 173, 174,
Hcathecote, N. H ., 236                              236
Hebrides, on Dulcert portolano, 116,           Italians, having access to maps in Con -
     267, 270                                        stantinople, 59
Henry, Thomas R ., 186                         Italy, on Dulcert portolano, 269
308    Index
Jaferiyes, 217, 222                        Libby, Willard , 199, 200
Jamaica , on Piri Re’is map, 256           Library of Congress, 79, 129
Japanese maps, 135                         Libya , on Dulcert portolano, 269
John , King of Portugal , 123, 128         Lindesnes Cape, on Zeno map, 156, 157
Juan de la Cosa map, 41, 43                Lineham , Daniel L., 2
Juby , Cape. See Yubi                      Lines, on portolanos, 5, 9, 11, 16-35
                                           Lisbon
Kahle, Philip, 61, 68, 70                    on Benincasa map, 283
Kalamai, on Dulcert portolano, 271           on Zara map, 286, 289
Kamal, Youssouf , 11 , 17                  Livengood , Loren , 16-17
Keene State College, 3, 122, 129, 205      Livonian Highlands, on Ptolemy’s map
Kerkcnnah Islands, on Zara map, 287              of the North , 165
Kiel glacier, on Finaeus map, 263          Loire River
Kitabe Bahriye , 54, 216, 217, 220           on Dulcert portolano, 268, 270
Kremer, Gerhard . See Mercator               on Zara map, 170, 286
                                           Londonderry, on De Canerio map, 121,
Labat , Pere, 42                                 122, 273, 274
Laccadive Islands, on Reinel map, 278      Longitude
Lagos                                        on Benincasa map, 167
  on De Canerio map, 123                     on Chinese map, 135, 139, 145, 146,
  on Venetian chart, 275, 276                    281
Land bridge, connecting Alaska and           on De Canerio map, 117, 120, 121,
     Siberia , 99                                122
Lands End                                     difficulty in finding , 41-42, 99, 123,
  on Benincasa map, 284                          182, 193
  on Dulcert portolano, 267, 270              on Dulcert portolano, 116
  on Zara map, 286                            on Finaeus map, 87
Language, universal, concept of , 204         on Hadji Ahmed map, 101
Latitudes                                     on Mercator map, 104, 106
  on Benincasa map, 167                       on Piri Re’is map, 1, 16, 17, 24, 27-28,
  on Chinese map, 138, 145, 146, 280             31, 33, 41, 50, 182, 183, 227
  on De Canerio map, 117, 120, 121,           on Ptolemy’s map of the North , 164
     122                                      on Venetian chart, 127
  on  Dulcert portolano, 116                  on Zara map, 170, 173
  on  Finaeus map, 87                         on Zeno map, 152, 157
  on  Hadji Ahmed map, 101                 Lopez, Cape
  on  Mercator map, 105                       on De Canerio map, 271, 274
  on  Piri Re’is map, 26-28, 33, 34, 41,      on Venetian chart, 128, 276
     50-51, 182, 183, 227                  Lutzow- Holm Bay
  on Ptolemy’s map of the North , 164         on Finaeus map, 261
  on Venetian chart, 127                      on Mercator map, 102, 266
  on Zara map, 170, 173                    Lyell, Charles, 197
  on Zeno map, 152, 157
Laurence Marques Bay, on Mercator          Machichaco Cape, on Zara map, 286
     map, 267                              Madagascar
Layard , Henry, 197                         on Mercator map, 267
Lee, Warren, 176                            on Reinel map, 277
Leeward Islands, on Piri Re’is map, 69,    Madeira Islands
     258                                    on Dulcert portolano, 268, 270
Lesbos, on De Canerio map, 120, 272,        on Piri Re’is map, 39, 49, 255
     274                                   Magdalena River, on Piri Re’is map, 256,
Lcscarbot map, 58                              258
Leverett glacier, on Finaeus map, 262      Magellan Strait, on Hadji Ahmed map,
Lewis, W . H ., 42                             264
                                                                           Index 309
Magnetic North . See Norths                     Mercator , Gerard, maps of ( cont.)
Majorca                                             compared with Finaeus map, 102 ,
 on Dulcert portolano, 268                              104, 106
 on Zara map, 288                                    geographical tables of , 265-267
Maldivc Islands, on Reinel map, 278                  latitudes on , 105
Mallery , Arlington , 2 , 19, 70, 72, 73, 75,        longitude on , 104, 106
    104, 152, 154, 155                               New Zealand on , 266
Malsbcndcn , John , 24, 25                           projection on , 103, 104
Mano River , on Piri Rc’is map, 254                  scale of , 106-107
Marajo Island                                        source maps for, 104, 105, 106, 107
 on Mercator map, 107                                South America on , 65, 66, 107, 235,
 on Piri Re’is map, 64, 65, 107, 257                     266
Marie Byrd Land                                      zero meridian on , 104-105
 on Finaeus map, 89-90 , 263                    Mercator Projection , 17, 18, 103, 104,
 on Mercator map, 102, 265                           122, 182, 183, 226-227, 228, 235
Marinus of Tyre, 10, 102, 159, 231                compared with Piri Rc’is map, 18, 35,
Marseilles                                            36
 on Bcnincasa map, 285                          Meridian ( s)
 on Dulcert portolano, 268                        of Alexandria , 31, 40, 104, 120 , 129,
Martinique, on Piri Re’is map, 257                   142, 152, 181, 249, 252, 282
Massachusetts Institute of Technology,
    19
                                                                       —
                                                  on Finaeus map, 87 88, 89, 93
                                                  of Gibraltar, 116
Mathematical basis for maps, 227-230              on Hadji Ahmed map, 99, 101
 for De Canerio map, 119, 120, 121                on Mercator map, 104-105
 for Piri Re’is map, 2, 19 , 26-27, 50,         Merz glacier, on Finaeus map, 262
    248-253                                     Mesopotamia , archaeology in , 197
 See also Trigonometry                          Mexican pyramid , studies of , 199-204,
Mathematics in antiquity , 237-238                    240-241
Mauritius, on Rcincl map, 277                   Mexico City, longitude of , on early maps,
                                                            '

Mayan civilization , 198                              41-42
Mazagan , on Zara map, 286                      Mid - Atlantic Ridge, 65, 67
Medieval maps, 5                                Minik Cape, on Venetian chart, 275, 276
Mediterranean area                              Minoans, 40
 on Bcnincasa map, 284                          Minor , Howard , 245
 compass declination in , 116                   Misurata , Cape
 on De Canerio map, 120 , 121 , 122,             on Bcnincasa map, 285
    183, 273, 274                                on Zara map, 287
  on Dc Canestris map, 129                      Mojador
 on Dulcert portolano, 10, 35, 116,              on Bcnincasa map, 283
    120, 164                                     on Zara map, 285
  on Finaeus map, 93                            Morison , Admiral, 40 , 41
  on Hadji Ahmed map, 99                        Morocco, on Zara map, 287
  modern map of , 57
  on Piri Re’is map, 54, 57                     Moroni River, on Piri Re’is map, 256
  portolan maps of , 5, 9, 183                  Moulouva River
                                                        m



  Ptolemy’s map of , 10, 35, 164                 on Bcnincasa map, 284
  on Zara map, 287-288                           on Zara map, 287
Mela , maps of , 15, 113                        Muhlig- Hofmann Mountains
Mercator , Gerard , 73, 116, 234, 235-236        on Finaeus map, 83, 261
  Atlas of , 129                                 on Mercator map , 102, 105, 266
  maps of                                        on Piri Re’is map, 259
     Africa on , 267                            Munster , Sebastian , 72
     Antarctica on, 102-111, 185, 235,          Murray, Wallace, 215
        265, 266                                Mythology, comparative, 204-206
310     Index
Navigational science, early, 40-42, 123,    Ohlmeyer, Harold , 29 , 243, 244
    184, 241, 242, 247                      Oleron Island , on Zara map, 170
Needham , Joseph , 135, 238                 Orinoco River
Negro Mountains, on Piri Re’is map, 257       on Mercator map, 107
Negro River, on Piri Rc’is map, 258           on Piri Rc’is map, 65, 69, 256, 257
Netherlands, on Benincasa map, 169          Oronteus Finaeus. See Finaeus map
Neumeyer Escarpment                         Ortelius, Abraham , 72
  on Finaeus map, 260                       Ortiz, Diogo, 124
  on Piri Rc’is map, 259                    Ortiz, Jose , 200
New Zealand , on Mercator map, 266          Oucssant Island , on Zara map, 170, 286
Niger River
  on De Canerio map, 121, 123, 271,         Padda Island , on Mercator map, 102,
      274                                        105, 266
  on Venetian chart , 275, 276              Palmas, Cape
Nimrod glacier , on Finaeus map, 262          on Dc Canerio map, 121, 272 , 274
Nordenskiold , A. E., 9, 10, 11, 26, 35,      on Piri Rc’is map, 254
    113, 116, 164, 169, 182                   on Venetian chart, 275, 276
  on Orontcus Finaeus, 233, 234             Palmer Peninsula
  on projection of Marinus of Tyre, 231       on Fineaus map, 83, 93, 264
North America                                 on Mercator map, 102, 105, 265, 266
  on Hadji Ahmed map, 99                      on Piri Re’is map, 72, 243, 259
  on Piri Re’is map, 1                      Papal Demarcation Lines, 22, 23, 24, 25
North Pole                                  Para River, on Piri Re’is map, 64
  on Piri Re’is map, 26, 27, 34             Paracas Peninsula , on Piri Re’is map , 68,
  on Zeno map, 156-157                           260
Norths                                      Parahyba River, on Piri Re’is map, 257
  Magnetic North                            Paria Peninsula
    on Benincasa map, 167                     on Hadji Ahmed map, 264
    on Dc Canerio map, 117, 121               on Piri Rc’is map, 69, 257
    on Dc Canestris map, 129, 138           Parnassus, 174
    on Dulcert portolano, 116
    on Piri Re’is map, 24-25, 26
                                            Pedrigal studies, near Mexico City, 199
                                                204, 240-241
                                                                                      —
    on portolan charts, 26                  Penas, Cape
    on Venetian chart , 128                   on Benincasa map, 283
  True North                                  on Zara map, 286
    on Dc Canerio map, 117, 120             Penck Trough
    on De Canestris map, 129, 138              on Finacus map, 260
    on Dulcert portolano, 116                 on Piri Rc’is map, 259
    on Piri Re’is map, 19, 24, 250          Penrose, Boies, 123, 124
    on portolano charts, 26                 Persian Gulf , on Dulcert portolano, 116
    on Venetian chart, 125, 128             Peru , on Mercator map, 266
  two Norths                                Phoenicians, 9, 40, 49, 73, 184, 185, 196,
    on Piri Rc’is map, 19, 50, 54, 63-64,
                                                  238, 241 , 247
                                            Pines, Isle of , on Piri Re’is map, 256
       135, 152                             Piri Re’is
    on Rcinel chart, 135                       biography of , 209-211, 246-247
    on Zeno map, 152, 155                      papers of , 214, 215-219
Norvcgia , Cape                             Piri Re’ is map, 1-37
  on Finaeus map, 260                          Africa on , 1 , 31, 33-34, 39-49, 73, 74,
  on Mercator map, 102, 105, 265                99, 117, 254
Norwav, on Zeno map, 152, 156, 157,           Alexandria as center of , 22
    282, 283                                  Amazon River on , 30, 64, 65, 68, 107
Numbering systems, ancient , 184, 185         America on , 1
Nuremberg, eclipse at, 41                     Andes on , 68
                                                                          Index 311
Piri Re’is map ( cont.)                        Piri Re’is map ( cont.)
   Antarctica on , 2, 19, 72-77, 98, 99,          omission of Drake Passage, 72, 75, 83,
     181 , 185, 259                                  259
   Atlantic Islands on , 40 , 49, 65, 70-72,      omission of South American coastline,
     255, 258-259, 260                               70-71, 75, 87, 258
   Berenice as center of , 30                     orientation of , 135, 152
   Caribbean area on , 30, 50-64, 69-70 ,         Orinoco River on , 65, 69, 256, 257
              -
     183, 255 256, 257-258                        Para River on , 64
  center of , 17, 19, 22-27, 30, 31, 181,         projection of , 135, 181 , 182-183, 228,
     227, 229, 244                                   231, 244
  and circumference of earth , 31-33              Queen Maud Land on , 2, 73-77, 232,
  compared with Dulccrt portolano, 5                243, 244 , 259
  as compilation of local maps, 29-30            radius of circle on , 17, 22, 24, 25, 30,
  Cuba on, 51 , 60-63, 255                          31 , 227, 249
  and Demarcation Lines, 22, 23, 24, 25          San Salvador on , 58, 256
  detailed examination of , 39-77                Shetland Islands on , 72, 259
  discovery of , 1                               source maps for, 1 , 2, 29-30, 35, 39,
  Dominican Republic on , 61, 256                   49, 58-59, 63, 64, 67, 70, 87, 123,
  equator on , 26, 27, 30, 33, 42, 49, 64,          138, 175, 181 , 244
     70 , 227                                    South America on , 1 , 30, 31, 64-69,
  equidistant polar projection on , 51 , 53         70-72, 75, 87, 256-257, 258-259
  errors in , 29, 30, 39                         Svene as center of , 22 , 24 , 25, 26, 31,
                                                  ‘
  Europe on , 39, 255                               227, 229, 244
  Falkland Islands on , 72 , 259                 trigonometrv for, 27, 31-32 , 35, 42,
  five projection centers on , 19, 20, 26,          49, 51 , 64, 70, 182-183, 184, 227,
     30, 33, 42, 49, 50, 64, 117, 227,              249
     248, 251                                    Tropic of Cancer on , 22, 26, 30, 31 ,
  fragment of , 62                                  42, 49, 181, 227, 249
  geographical tables for, 254-260               Tropic of Capricorn on , 49, 64
  grid construction for, 19, 21, 27-28,          True North on , 19, 24, 26, 250
     29, 36-37, 122, 184, 229-230, 231           Virgin Islands on , 70, 258
  Guinea coast on , 33, 42, 49, 73, 74            Weddell Sea on , 75, 259, 265
  Haiti on , 61, 256                              Windward Islands on , 69
  hypothetical projection of , 33-35              Yucatan on , 50, 69, 256, 258

     182 , 183, 227
                   —
  latitudes on , 26 28, 33, 34, 41 , 50-51,      zodiac figures on , 242
                                               Pisana Carta , 121
  Leeward Islands on , 69, 258                 Plancius, map of , 72
  legends on , 220-224                         Planetarium , ancient , 198
  lines on , 5, 9, 17-35                       Plata River, on Hadji Ahmed map, 264
  longitude on , 24, 27-28, 31, 33, 41,        Plato, 196
     50, 182, 183, 227                         Poland , on Ptolemy’s map of the North ,
  Madeira on , 39, 49, 255                          165
                                               Polar equidistant projection , 135, 226
  and Magnetic North , 24-25, 26                 and Finaeus map, 87
  Marajo Island on , 64, 65, 107, 257            and Piri Rc’is map, 51, 183
  mathematical basis for , 2, 19, 26-27,       Pomponius, maps of , 15, 113
     50 , 248-253                              Portolan maps, 5
  Mercator projection compared with ,            of Antarctica , 79
     18, 35, 36                                   Bcnincasa map, 167-169
  more than one North on , 19, 50, 54,           Carta Pisana , 121
     63-64, 135, 152                             compared with Chinese map, 135, 145
  non -existent islands on , 260                  De Canerio map, 117-125
  and North Pole position , 26, 27, 34           directions for construction of , 224-225
  northern wind rose on , 22, 24                  Dulcert portolano, 113-117
312     Index
Portolan maps (cont .)                    Queen Fabiola Mountains, on Finaeus
  lines on , 5, 9, 11, 16-35                  map, 261
  mathematical basis for , 19, 121        Queen Maud Land
  measure used in , 9                       on Finacus map, 83, 89, 260-261, 262
  normal portolano, 183                     on Mercator map, 102, 105, 265, 266
  North on , 26                             on Piri Re’is map, 2, 73-77, 232, 243,
  original sources of , 9, 11                 244, 259
  Reinel chart, 134-135, 140-143            route of expedition across, 77, 231
  Venetian chart , 125-128
  Zara map, 169-178                       Radiocarbon dating, 199-200
  See also Piri Rc’is map                 Rawlinson , Henry, 197, 198
Portugal                                  Re Island , on Zara map, 170
  on Dulcert portolano, 268               Recife, on Piri Re’is map, 257
  on Zara map, 286                        Red Sea
Portuguese explorers, 123-124, 128          on Benincasa map, 285
Portuguese map of Indian Ocean , 134
                      -
     135, 140-143, 277 278
Price, Derek, 198
                                      —     on Dc Canerio map, 273
                                          Regiomontanus, 41
                                          Rcgula Range
Prince Harald Coast                         on Finacus map, 260
  on Finaeus map, 261                       on Mercator map, 102, 105, 265
  on Mercator map, 102 , 105, 266           on Piri Re’is map, 259
Prince Olaf Coast , on Mercator map,      Rcincl chart of Indian Ocean , 134-135,
     102, 266                                  140-143
Princess Astrid Coast                       geographical table of , 277-278
  on Mercator map, 266                      orientation of , 135
  on Piri Re’is map, 73                   Reunion Island , on Rcincl map, 277
Princess Martha Coast                     Rhine River
  on Mercator map, 266                      on Benincasa map, 284
  on Piri Re’is map, 73, 98, 243            on Zara map, 287
Projections for maps, 102, 225-227        Rhodes, on Dulccrt portolano, 269 , 271
   See also specific maps                 Rhone River, on Zara map, 288
Ptolemy, Claudius, 31, 102 , 157, 167,    Rich , Claudius, 197
     169, 181, 182, 226, 231, 233, 235,   Riga Gulf
      273                                   on Benincasa map, 169
Ptolemy maps, 93, 99, 113, 121, 125         on Dc Canerio map, 273
  Basilac Map of 1 540, 47                Robertson , Archibald , 242
  of Mediterranean , 10-11                Romans, burning libraries, 195, 196
    compared with Dulccrt portolano,      Ropkc Mountain , on Piri Rc’is map, 259
        10, 35, 164                       Ross Sea
  of the North , 159-167
                                            cores from , 96-98, 185, 189, 235
                                            on Finacus map, 83, 89, 92, 93-97,
     characteristics of , 164                  262, 264
     compared with Zeno map, 164, 165,      on Mercator map, 266
        167                                 waterways to, 93, 189
     glaciers indicated on , 185, 190     Rostov , on Dulcert portolano, 269, 271
     source map for, 167                  Roxc Cape, on Venetian chart, 275, 276
  projections of , 35, 50                 Russia
  of Spain , 175                            on Dulcert portolano, 116, 269, 271
  of world , 13                             on Ptolemy’s map of the North , 165
Puerto Gibara , location of , 41          Ruysch map, 41, 48
Pyramid of Cuicuilco, 199-204, 240-241    Ryan , Frank , 25, 28, 29, 229

Queen Alexandra Range, on Finaeus         Saarma Island , on De Canerio map, 273
    map, 262                              Sabrina Coast, on Finaeus map, 83
                                                                      Index 313
St. Bride’s Bay, on Zara map, 287          Sevastopol
St . Helena Bay, on Mercator map, 267         on Dc Canerio map, 120, 272 , 274
                               —
St . Lawrence River, map of , 58 59
St. Paul River, on Piri Re’is map, 254
                                              on Dulcert portolano, 269, 271
                                           Seychelles Islands, on Reincl map, 277
St . Vincent, Cape                         Sherrill, Charles, 211-215, 219
    on Bcnincasa map, 283                  Shetland Islands
    on De Cancrio map, 121 , 273, 274         on Piri Re’is map, 72, 259
    on Piri Re’is map, 255                    on Zeno map, 1 52, 282
    on Zara map, 286, 289                  Ship building, history of , 247
Salamanca , eclipse at , 41                Shirasc glacier
Salvador , on Piri Rc’is map, 257             on Finacus map, 261
San Diego Cape, on Piri Re’is map, 70,        on Mercator map, 102, 105, 266
      72, 259                              Siberia , land bridge to Alaska , 99
San Francisco River, on Piri Re’is map,    Sicily
    257                                       on De Cancrio map, 120, 272, 274
San Gorge Gulf                                on Dulcert portolano, 268
  on Mercator map, 266                        on Zara map, 288
  on Piri Rc’is map, 259                   Sierra Leona Rise, 65, 67
San Mathias Gulf                           Sinai Peninsula , on Dulcert portolano,
  on Mercator map, 266                          116, 269
  on Piri Re’is map, 258                   Source maps
San Salvador, on Piri Re’is map, 58, 256     of Antarctica , projections on , 102
San Sebastian Cape, on Mercator map,         for Benincasa map, 169
     267                                     for De Canerio map, 117, 121, 123
Sanson , map of , 72                         for Finaeus map, 87, 89, 93, 96, 233,
Santo Domingo, on Piri Re’is map, 256           244-245
S3o Rocquc Cape, on Piri Re’is map, 257      for Hadji Ahmed map, 99
S3o Tom 6                                    for Mercator map, 104, 105, 106, 107
  on Dc Cancrio map, 271, 274                for Piri Re’is map, 1, 2, 29-30, 35, 39,
  on Rcincl map, 277                            49, 58-59, 63, 64, 67, 70, 87, 123,
  on Venetian chart , 128, 276                  138, 175, 181, 244
Sardinia                                     for Ptolemy’s map of the North , 167
  on Dc Cancrio map, 120, 272 , 274          for Zeno map, 167
  on Dulcert portolano, 268                South America
Sarton , George, 32, 33, 181                 on Finaeus map, 83, 93
Schlicmann , 197                             on Hadji Ahmed map, 99
Schoncr Globe, Antarctica on , 84-85         on Mercator map, 65, 66, 107, 235,
Schiitt , Gudmund , 159                         266
Science in antiquity, 237-238                                                   -
                                             on Piri Re’is map, 1, 30, 31, 64 69,
Scilly Islands                                   70-72, 75, 87, 256-257, 258-259
  on Dulcert portolano, 267, 270               omission of coastline, 70-71, 75, 87,
  on Zara map, 286                               258
                                           South Georgia Island , on Piri Re’is map,
Scotland                                       259, 260
  on Dulcert portolano, 267, 270           South Pole, on Finacus map, 79, 87, 98,
  on Zeno map, 152, 282                        233
Scott glacier, on Finaeus map, 93, 261     Southern California , University of , 200
Sebu River                                 Spain
  on Dulcert portolano, 268, 270             on Dulcert portolano, 268
  on Piri Rc’is map, 254                     on Ptolemy’s map, 175
Seller , map of , 72                         on Zara map, 174, 176, 185, 231, 288-
Senegal River                                  290
  on Piri Re’is map, 254                   Spaulding, E. Wilder , 218
  on Venetian chart, 275, 276              Spencer , Lee, 22, 30, 63, 70, 75
314     Index
Stadium , as measure of length , 32-33,       Trieste ( cont.)
     181                                        on Dulccrt portolano, 269
Stalingrad, on Dulcert portolano, 269,          on Zara map, 288
     271                                      Trigonometry in map making , 27, 31-32,
Stars, for navigation , 184, 242                   117, 228
State Department correspondence, 211-           for Piri Rc’is map, 42, 49, 64, 70
     219                                        plane, 27, 31 , 181, 182
Stcfansson , Vilhjalmur, 241                       for Piri Rc’is map, 31-32, 227, 249
Stephenson , Richard , 79, 129
Stenographic map projection , 1 58, 225,
                                                   for Venetian chart, 125, 128, 130
                                                      131, 184
                                                                                    —
     245                                        for portolanos, 121
Stimson , Henry, 2                              spherical , 181-184
Stonehenge, 199                                    for Bcnincasa map, 167
Strachan , Richard , 19, 26-27, 30, 122,           for Chinese map, 139, 145, 184
     183, 244                                      for De Canerio map, 119, 120, 121,
   on Finaeus projection , 233                                         -
                                                      122, 123, 139, 183 184, 253
   on grid construction for Piri Re’is map,        for Finaeus map, 183, 245
     229-230                                       and Mercator projection , 35
   on map projections, 225-227
   on necessity for trigonometry on maps,
                                                                                    —
                                                   for Piri Rc’is map, 27, 35, 51, 182
                                                      183, 184, 227, 242
     228                                           for Zeno map, 152, 183
Sudeten Mountains, on Ptolemy’s map           Trinidad , on Mercator map, 107
     of the North , 165                       Tristan d ’Acunha
Sweden                                          on Piri Re’is map, 260
   on Bcnincasa map, 185                        on Rcincl map, 277
   physiographic map of , 165                 Tropic of Cancer
   on Ptolemy’s map of the North , 164,         on Piri Re’is map, 22, 26, 30, 31, 42,
      185                                          49, 181 , 227, 249
  on Zara map, 185                              on Reinel map, 143
  on Zeno map, 1 52                           Tropic of Capricorn
Sycnc, as center of Piri Re’is map, 22 ,        on Mercator map, 107
     24, 25, 26, 31, 227, 229, 244              on Piri Re’is map, 49, 64
Sylvanus, 226                                   on Reinel map, 143
                                              Troy, civilization of , 194 , 197
Tagus River                                   True North . See Norths
  on Dulccrt portolano, 268, 270              Tunisia , on Dulcert portolano, 116, 268
  on Piri Rc’is map, 255                      Turkey
  on Zara map, 286                              on Dulccrt portolano, 269
Tanganyika , on Reincl map, 277                 Piri Rc’is map in , 1
Taylor , E . G . R ., 184                     Turkish geographers, correspondence
Texas, on Hadji Ahmed map, 265                     with, 211-219
Thames River, on Dulcert portolano,                 -
                                              Twelve wind svstem , 125, 127, 128, 129,
     267, 270                                      137, 184-185, 236, 242
Thorne map, 41, 44, 72
Three Points, Cape                            Uraba Gulf , on Piri Re’is map, 256
  on Dc Cancrio map, 121 , 272, 274           Urry, W . D, 96, 98
  on Venetian chart , 275, 276
Thurston Island , on Mercator map, 102,       Valparaiso, on Piri Re’is map, 260
    105, 265                                  Vance, Don , 245
Timosthcncs, 125                              Venetian chart , 125-128
Toscanclli map, 59, 61                          analysis of , 276
Tres Forcas Cape, on Zara map, 287              geographical table of , 274-276
Trieste                                         grid construction for, 127, 130
  on Bcnincasa map, 285                         orientation of , 125, 128
                                                                      Index 315
Venetian chart ( cont.)                      Wixson , E. A ., 122 , 253
  trigonometry for, 125, 128, 130-131,       Woitkowski , Robert , 16
     184                                     World map
  and twelve-wind system , 125, 127, 184      of Eratosthenes, 14
Venetians, capturing Constantinople, 1 58     of Idrisi, 12
Venezuela Gulf , on Piri Re’ is map, 69,      of Piri Rc’is. See Piri Rc’is map
     256, 258                                 of Pomponius Mela , 15
Vespucci , Amerigo, 72                        of Ptolemy, 13
Victor Expedition , 1 54
Victoria Land , on Finaeus map, 89, 262      Yale University, 129, 198
Victor , Alexander , 17, 129                 Yalta
Vilanovano map, 41                             on Bcnincasa map, 167, 285
Villa Cisneros, on Venetian chart , 275,       on Zara map, 288
     276                                     Yellow River, on Chinese map, 139 , 144
Vincennes Bay , on Mercator map, 266         Yubi, Cape
Vinci, Leonardo da , 199                       on Bcnincasa map, 167, 283
Vinland map, 245                               on De Cancrio map, 272, 274
Virgin Islands, on Piri Re’is map, 70, 258     on Dulccrt portolano, 268, 270
Vizinho, Joseph , 123, 124                     on Piri Re is map, 254
Volga River, on Dulccrt portolano, 269         on Zara map, 173, 285
Volta River , on Venetian chart , 275, 276   Yucatan, on Piri Re is map, 50, 69, 256,
Vorposten Peak , on Piri Rc’ is map, 259          258
                                             Yusuf Akcura Bey, 211-215, 219
Wadler , Arnold , 204
Waerden , B. L. van der , 238                Zacuto, Abraham , 41 , 123, 124
Waldseemullcr maps, 41                       Zanzibar , on Rcincl map, 277
Walspergcr map, 7                            Zara map, 169-178
Walters, M . I, 2                              Aegean Sea on , 176, 177, 185
Walvis Bay                                     analysis of , 290
 on Dc Cancrio map, 121, 271, 274              faces on , 173-174
 on Mercator map, 267                          geographical table of , 285-290
Weddell Sea                                    glaciers indicated on , 185, 190
 on Finaeus map, 92, 264                       grid construction for, 170, 172, 173,
 on Mercator map, 102, 105, 265, 266              174, 176
 on Piri Re’is map, 75, 259, 265               latitudes on , 170, 173
 waterways to, 93, 189                         longitude on , 170, 173
Wegener, Alfred , 187, 188                     projection of , 231
Werner, Johannes, 226, 234                     Spain on , 174, 176, 185, 231, 288-290
Weser River , on Zeno map, 282               Zeno map of the North , 107, 149-158,
Weston Observatory of Boston College,             245
    2                                          compared with Ptolemy’s map of the
Westover Air Force Base, 28, 29                   North , 164, 165, 167
Wight, Isle of                                 geographical table of , 281-283
 on Dulcert portolano, 267, 270                grid construction for, 157
 on Zara map, 286                              latitudes on , 157
Wilkes Land , on Finaeus map, 83, 89,          longitude on , 1 57
    261-262                                    projection of , 1 52, 1 53, 1 54, 183
Wilson , H . Tuzo, 187, 188                    source map for , 167
Windward Islands, on Piri Rc’is map, 69      Zodiac, of Babylonians, 184, 238, 242
                           About the Author

         Charles H. Hapgood , a professor at Keene State College in Keene,
New Hampshire, is a lifelong student of the history of science. In a
previous book , Earth’ s Shifting Crust , Hapgood offered
answers to long-standing enigmas of geology. In a foreword to that book,
Albert Einstein said Hapgood’s idea could be “ of great importance
to everything that is related to the history of the earth ’s surface.” In
Maps of the Ancient Sea Kings, Hapgood offers theories of importance
to the history of mankind itself .
